He was on the phone with a detective on Dec. 14, providing more information about how his accomplices had stolen a large shipment of human growth hormone. Suddenly, the detective heard a loud scream. Then the phone went silent.

That was the last contact Tom Britt of the Phoenix Police Department had with Konstantin Simberg before Mr. Simberg's body turned up two days later and 100 miles northwest of Phoenix, in Yavapai County.

For now, three men from the Phoenix area have been indicted on charges of kidnapping and murdering Mr. Simberg, a 21-year-old Russian immigrant, though two of them disappeared after they were released on bail and remain at large. The one in custody, Dennis V. Tsoukanov, 20, a Russian citizen, is scheduled for arraignment on Wednesday.

Five other men have been indicted on felony counts related to a scheme first to hijack the shipment of growth hormone from a delivery truck and -- when that failed -- steal it from the pharmacy that ordered it. One of the five, Maxim Chinchyus, 18, a Russian who overstayed his student visa, is in jail. The others are free, awaiting trial.

The drug is Saizen, an expensive form of growth hormone, and it has only limited legitimate uses -- helping young children with growth problems and AIDS patients who are wasting away.

But it also has one well-known illegal use in competitive sports. As a substance that stimulates the body to build muscle mass, human growth hormone has been popular for years with elite athletes as a performance enhancer because it is nearly impossible to detect in drug screenings.

Investigators believe that the two groups of defendants, which also include a son and son-in-law of the pharmacy's owners, are linked through Mr. Simberg, who they say was involved in the hijacking and burglary plans and later became a police informer. The Phoenix police said they were still trying to tie the crimes together through the forensic evidence of his death.

''It's a real bowl of spaghetti,'' Detective Britt said today, describing what the police consider to be one of their most unusual cases in years. ''But when it shakes out, it will all make sense.''

The case began, Detective Britt said, when a group of young men planned to steal 6,000 units of Saizen from a Federal Express truck at the moment of delivery on Sept. 24 to the Cactus Pharmacy in Paradise Valley, a well-to-do Phoenix suburb.

He said that investigators still did not know what their interest was in the drug, which has a wholesale price of $160 for a 5-milligram vial.

Investigators said one theory was that the group might have intended to sell the drugs to athletes competing in the Winter Olympics next month in Salt Lake City. But that motive has not been established.

Nor has another theory -- that the men wanted to steal the drug in an insurance scam -- been proved. Detective Britt said that one of the five men indicted, Sean Shaffer, the son of the pharmacy's owners, had increased the pharmacy's insurance coverage on the day of the burglary.

The Maricopa County attorney, Richard M. Romley, said the shipment of Saizen that the group intended to steal had a wholesale value of nearly $1 million and a black-market value of three times that.

On the morning the delivery truck arrived, though, some of the thieves bungled their assignments and plans went awry, Detective Britt said. As the intended thieves scattered -- Mr. Simberg was among them, the detective said -- the driver delivered the drugs to Cactus Pharmacy.

Two days later, Detective Britt said, another indicted man, Troy D. Langdon, 28, the son-in-law of the pharmacy owners, quietly sold the drugs to a local wholesaler for nearly $1 million.

A week after the sale, Detective Britt said, the conspirators staged a fake robbery at the pharmacy, presumably, he said, for an insurance claim for the stolen growth hormone. But after investigators reconstructed what happened by studying data from the electronic burglar alarm, they said they were led to the five who were later indicted by a Maricopa County grand jury.

Fred Shaffer, who owns the pharmacy with his wife, Marcia, denied any wrongdoing, saying he was the victim of the plot.

''The product was stolen from our store,'' he said in a brief interview. ''It was a shock to all of us. We had nothing to do with the break-in whatsoever.''

Detective Britt said that Mr. Simberg reported many details of the plot and also told them that he had been warned not to talk to the police or he would be killed.

That, Detective Britt said, is apparently what happened. A grand jury indicted Mr. Tsoukanov and two other men, Chris Gabriel Andrews and Mikhail Drachev, both 18, who were linked to Mr. Simberg through calls made on cellphones and evidence found in their apartments. After their release on bail, Mr. Andrews and Mr. Drachev fled the area, Detective Britt said.

Investigators said that while several of the men are of Russian background or speak Russian, they have ruled out an initial suspicion that the plot could have been the work of a Russian crime syndicate.

Mr. Simberg's body was discovered on an brambled path in a remote area known as Fossil Creek. Sharon Wachner, a spokeswoman for the Yavapai County Sheriff's Office, said that deer hunters had stumbled upon him and called for help.

''It was a matter of a couple days,'' Ms. Wachner said, ''before we found out what we had.''
