THE NO. 1 LADIES' DETECTIVE AGENCY

By Alexander McCall Smith.

226 pp. New York:

Columbia University Press/Polygon. Paper, $12.95.

TEARS OF THE GIRAFFE

By Alexander McCall Smith.

202 pp. New York:

Columbia University Press/Polygon. Paper, $12.95.

MORALITY FOR

BEAUTIFUL GIRLS

By Alexander McCall Smith.

225 pp. New York:

Columbia University Press/Polygon. Paper, $12.95.

AT first, they might seem the unlikeliest of couples. Alexander McCall Smith is an elderly professor of medical law at Edinburgh University, a prolific author of reference and childrens' books and the founder (and resident bassoonist) of an ensemble called the Really Terrible Orchestra. His latest literary creation is a short, hefty (or, as she prefers, ''traditionally built'') middle-aged African woman with the deceptively delicate name of Precious Ramotswe, who has traveled a bit in her native Botswana but has never been as far as Johannesburg -- and certainly not as far as ''London or wherever detectives went to find out how to be private detectives'' before setting up in business as her country's first and only female sleuth. But it's quickly apparent that these two have more in common than energy and eccentricity. From the opening line in Smith's series of novels about Mma Ramotswe (the polite Setswana form of address by which she is known, even to her most intimate friends), it's clear that he's familiar enough with southern Africa to put a playful spin on most Western readers' assumptions.

''Mma Ramotswe had a detective agency in Africa, at the foot of Kgale Hill.'' Obviously, Smith has read his Dinesen. And a quick check of his other publications reveals him to be the author of an entire volume on ''The Criminal Law of Botswana.'' But in keeping with his interest in tinkering with stereotypes -- about Africa and, it seems, the detective novel -- he gives us a heroine who turns out to be interested less in building a conventional case than in following what we would call common sense and she calls old-fashioned Botswana morality. ''We are not that sort of detective,'' Mma Ramotswe proclaims indignantly when an important government official asks her to assist in catching a poisoner. ''We help people with the problems in their lives. We are not here to solve crimes.''

Of course, problems often lead to crimes. But Mma Ramotswe's methods -- and her results -- are as unusual as the novels they inhabit. What else would you expect from a lady who can kill a crocodile with one perfectly placed shot in the pitch dark (and then slit its stomach to retrieve a crucial piece of evidence), but goes all wobbly when she hears someone lurking outside her house in the middle of the night?

There's a good deal of bustle in the series' first volume, ''The No. 1 Ladies' Detective Agency,'' but hardly any suspense. And by the time you've made your way through the second, ''Tears of the Giraffe,'' and landed in the third, ''Morality for Beautiful Girls,'' you've realized that all this activity is much less about whodunit than why. It's also very much about the variety and resilience of a nation to which Smith (who grew up in what is now Zimbabwe and taught law at the University of Botswana) seems utterly devoted. As, of course, is Mma Ramotswe, who recognizes the difficulties her country faces -- poverty, disease and drought, to name just a few -- but would never choose to live anywhere else. Not even America.

As she pursues her investigations in the city of Gaborone and then out across the dusty cattle country where she grew up, not far from the Kalahari Desert, Mma Ramotswe acts as much like Miss Manners as Miss Marple. In this, she is assisted by the equally formidable Mma Makutsi, a plain-faced, bespectacled graduate of the Botswana Secretarial College who has discovered, to her chagrin, that the better-paying jobs have all gone to classmates who spent more time at the hairdresser than the library. This provides sufficient motivation, over the course of the three novels, for her to rise from secretary to assistant detective, and then to acting manager of Tlokweng Road Speedy Motors, the garage owned by J. L. B. Matekoni, an honorable but timid mechanic who spends the first novel courting Mma Ramotswe, the second novel being pressured into adopting two Bushman orphans to provide his fiancée with an instant family, and the third in a (perhaps related) depression.

In the course of her work, Mma Ramotswe offers ample evidence of her country's complexities and contradictions. She disapproves of the interfering ways of a rich Indian merchant who hires her to spy on his teenage daughter, and winds up going to the movies with the girl instead of tracking down the boyfriend her father fears will steal her away. But Mma Ramotswe also succumbs to the plea of an American woman who wants her to reopen a seemingly hopeless missing persons case, partly because the American has such good manners: ''Most white people shook hands very rudely, snatching just one hand and leaving their other hand free to perform all sorts of mischief.'' When an investigation into an adulterous wife leads to an awkward paternity question, Mma Ramotswe resolves it by deciding what would be best for the wronged husband and the innocent child. And when a freeloader imposes himself on a hard-working accountant, claiming to be her long-lost father, Mma Ramotswe determines to expose him as a fraud, outraged that he has taken advantage of the African tradition of support for relatives.

Practical yet softhearted, inventive yet steeped in convention, Mma Ramotswe is an appealing personality -- so appealing, in fact, that the film rights to her stories have been bought by Anthony Minghella, director of ''The English Patient'' and ''The Talented Mr. Ripley,'' who plans to work with a South African company to portray her in a television series. This would have the obvious advantage of letting us see more of the landscape that means so much to her. It might also have the benefit of leaping over the occasional longeurs of Smith's prose, whose formal cadences can sometimes slide into a languid drone, demonstrating all too well what Mma Ramotswe means by the ''heaviness'' that brings everything to a halt during the heat of noontime. On the other hand, it's hard to imagine how even the cleverest director could capture the wanderings of her thoughts, which contribute so much to her charm. Listening to a BBC broadcast about philosophers, for example, she is startled, then amused, by a description that sounds very much like her selfish, abusive ex-husband: ''She had been married to an existentialist herself, without even knowing it.''

Perhaps because of her marital history, Mma Ramotswe has no illusions about the opposite sex (''All men carried on with ladies, in her experience. The only men who did not were ministers of religion and headmasters''), but she's equally cleareyed when it comes to her female clients: ''The wives of missing men are all the same, thought Mma Ramotswe. At first they feel anxiety, and are convinced that something dreadful has happened. Then doubt begins to creep in, and they wonder whether he's gone off with another woman (which he usually has), and then finally they become angry. At the anger stage, most of them don't want him back anymore, even if he's found. They just want to have a good chance to shout at him.''

Sitting in her ocher-walled office with its tin roof and itinerant chickens, Mma Ramotswe sips redbush tea and ponders the ethics of her cases: the wife who wants the detective to steal back the car her husband has stolen; the grief-stricken mother who, with Mma Ramotswe's deft application of a little blackmail, might be reunited with a young grandson. How to act? Or whether to act at all? ''I think,'' she concludes toward the end of ''Morality for Beautiful Girls,'' ''that there are some matters that are best left undisturbed. We don't want to know the answer to everything.'' What would Agatha Christie have made of that?

Alida Becker is an editor at the Book Review.
