IN the 1980's, Bridgeport's roads were just one more indication of the city's sorry state of affairs. A mere year or so after a road had been repaved, a segment of it would crack slightly and rise like a soufflé. Then it would collapse.

Although Bridgeport's money troubles were partly to blame, repairing roads in New England has always been like pulling weeds or making beds. Do it one day, get up and do it again the next. But unlike weeds and beds, where time and energy are all that is required, money drives road maintenance. There is just never enough to go around.

A recent report from a Washington-based advocacy group for construction companies, unions and other groups keenly interested in cracks in roads, ranked Connecticut fourth in the nation for poor to mediocre pavement conditions. The Road Information Program's numbers shocked state transportation officials, who defended the money they had spent on smoothing out the state's highways: $85 million this year on road resurfacing alone, more than $500 million on road and bridge reconstruction. How could the Road Information Program not notice?

What the survey failed to articulate was that for the most part, the state's 544 miles of highways are in decent shape. The program said that 6 percent of the state's roads are poor and 17 percent mediocre. It turns out that the major highways, like Interstates 86, 91 and 95, are in fine shape. Get off those highways, though, and the bumpy ride begins.

''It's an ongoing battle to try to maintain roads across the state,'' said John Wallace, a spokesman for the State Department of Transportation. ''There's a lot of traffic out there, and a real marriage to the automobile. Your major interstates are going to get the most attention because they're the most visible and the most used.''

State government shares responsibility with municipalities for maintaining the rest of Connecticut's 20,301 miles of pavement. But municipalities struggle to maintain roads with far fewer dollars than the state. The state-run Local Capital Improvement Program uses a formula based on the grand list, road miles and population to split $30 million a year among 169 municipalities. About $18 million of that goes to road improvement projects.

In turn, town budgets focus on what citizens demand: Strong schools, recreation and the needs of senior citizens. Pavement improvements often slip to the bottom of the list, in some towns more than others.

''I think Farmington Avenue in Hartford is a mess,'' said Mike Meotti, a member of the Transportation Strategy Board, which was created by the State Legislature to make recommendations on transportation strategy. ''But when I get into West Hartford, it's not.''

Clearly, he said, the wealthier communities not only have the state money, but also use some of their own to maintain their roads. In poorer communities, all they have is the state money.

''It is worse,'' Arthur Miller, director of public works for Hartford, said of Farmington Avenue.

A task force of volunteers is working on a plan to reconstruct the avenue, but that depends on whether the city pursues bonding for the project. With the city coming up short on money for basic services, smoothing out Farmington Avenue may not seem a priority, Mr. Miller admitted. Still, he did manage to pay for repaving a mile or so of the street right at the West Hartford line, so motorists can start a sleeker ride before they hit the city limits.

Sixty municipalities use pavement-performance software to pinpoint problem areas. Many towns hire Vanasse Hangen Brustlin, a Middletown engineering company, to coordinate use of the software and evaluate pavement conditions. The information is fed into the computer using a model that includes budget restraints.

''For example, I tell the software I have $500,000 a year to make road improvements,'' said Gordon Daring, an engineer with the company. ''Then I ask it, 'which road should I fix first?' It will print that out, and tell me that at this rate, it's going to take 105 years to correct all the road problems I have because I don't have enough money.''

Chris Mannella works with the software for Norwalk, which has been using it for about 15 years. It enables him to recite problem areas in seconds: Comstock Hill, Highland Avenue, the list goes on.

''First, we get complaints because the road is a mess,'' Mr. Mannella said. ''We get complaints when we're fixing it, because motorists are inconvenienced. And we get complaints when it's fixed, because it's become a speedway. ''

Which road is he talking about? ''All of them,'' he said with a sigh.

Bridgeport uses pavement performance software, as does New Haven. Bridgeport eventually managed to fix its worst arterial and main roads, said John Marsilio, the city's director of public works.

New Haven is doing much the same, with similar financial challenges.

''It's very difficult to come up with millions of dollars a year to upgrade the roads to standards,'' said Richard Miller, the director of engineering and public works for New Haven. ''A community like New Haven is a very old community. We're dealing with areas primarily developed during the horse and buggy.'' So his employees patch potholes and repave roads that are particularly worn, while waiting for more money to do more.

Other town officials could consider doing what Salisbury, a town in the northwest corner, does when it encounters roads that are troublesome in winter. It closes them.

But then Salisbury is so small that the first selectman, Val Bernardoni, can survey every road, every culvert, every drain in town in a mere two days. For comparison, a roundup of road conditions in New Haven took two years.

Salisbury also is packed with dirt roads, beloved by residents who use them as horse paths and who fear that paving would encourage speeding traffic and tourists traipsing through their privacy. Half paved, half dirt, the road to Mount Riga, one of the state's highest summits, is closed to traffic in the winter. It is too hard to plow, too difficult to maintain, Mr. Bernardoni said.

Paved country roads fare a little better in winter. But framed by forests, they get little sunlight, contributing to their decay. Yet Mr. Bernardoni insisted that once a citizen calls in with a pothole complaint, the hole is patched.

Unlike many other smaller towns, residents of Salisbury don't have to wait. The town has its own paver and performs its own asphalt work.

At least one community tries to inject levity into pothole problems.

In years with brutal winters, The Glastonbury Citizen, a local newspaper, runs a contest in which participants call in with the most precarious pothole they can find.

The pothole of 2001, near a bridge on Country Club Road, was one of the largest the newspaper's staff had ever seen, given more time to grow by a dispute over who was responsible for fixing it.

The person who called in the winning pothole received neither a dinner out or theater tickets. First prize was a front-end alignment.
