Here in steel country, where the hum of mills has waned and where some unemployed workers worry more than they sleep these days, there was hope tonight that the president's State of the Union address would offer a salve, if not a solution, for these troubled economic times.

In the basement of Eddie Gonzalez's home in this small Northwest Indiana town, several of his former co-workers sat anxiously under the glare of a television. Until recently, the men worked at the LTV Corporation steel plant in nearby East Chicago, Ind. Like his friends, Mr. Gonzalez, 42, a maintenance mechanic welder, was among 2,500 workers laid off in recent months from the East Chicago plant. Mr. Gonzalez had worked in the steel industry for 23 years, the last nine at LTV until he was laid off.

''Let's listen to Bush save the steel industry,'' said Mr. Gonzalez, a Democrat, picking up the remote control and turning up the volume.

''He ain't gonna say nothing,'' said Scott Mellinger, 41, another laid-off LTV worker who seemed somewhat less enthusiastic than his friends.

The half a dozen men who watched the president's speech at Mr. Gonzalez's home found some solace in Mr. Bush's talk of building a stronger economy, but seemed to be left with more questions than answers and little comfort about their future.

''What about pensions?'' Mr. Gonzalez yelled about half an hour into the president's speech.

''What this country needs is something to help people who are on the bubble,'' said Mr. Mellinger, adding that he had applied for food stamps since being laid off from LTV.

Across the nation tonight, Americans gathered with friends and family around televisions, listening to President Bush's first State of the Union address delivered with the backdrop of the war on terrorism, a slumping economy and with the wounds of Sept. 11 still fresh in the hearts and minds of many. So tonight, while some found less hope than they expected, others like Charles Wolf found solace in the president's words.

Mr. Wolf, 47, whose wife died in the World Trade Center attacks on Sept. 11, watched the speech in the Greenwich Village apartment that they shared for 13 years.

''I've been very impressed with what he has done so far,'' said Mr. Wolf, a registered Republican who voted for Mr. Bush in 2000.

As he watched the speech, Mr. Wolf sat in the same chair that he sat in when he heard a jet flying in on Sept. 11. Seconds later, he heard a large boom as it struck the north tower, instantly killing his wife, who worked on the 97th floor at Marsh & McLennan Companies.

When Mr. Bush spoke of the terrorists responsible for the attacks, Mr. Wolf was moved to tears.

''He's right -- it was evil driving those jetliners,'' Mr. Wolf said.  ''Over all it made me proud of him. He has found his cause since 9/11 -- I have not seen him make a serious mistake since then.''

Still some people like Ruth Lessner, 79, who was among four women who gathered at their condominium in Hollywood, Fla., to watch Mr. Bush, seemed to believe the president's speech fell short on substance in some areas.

''What's he doing for seniors? Absolutely nothing,'' Ms. Lessner said, contending that the president barely touched on issues important to older people.

But Pearl Feder, who gave her age as ''over 65,'' said that the president ''has come a long way.''

''I'm pleasantly surprised,'' Ms. Feder said. ''He's got a big job in front of him with this terrorism.''

The president's main emphasis, national security, went over particularly well with a group of marines at Marine Corps Air Station in Miramar, Calif., which was home to the crews of a helicopter and refueling plane that went down in separate accidents this month in Afghanistan and Pakistan.

''I wanted to determine where the country is going, and I think he helped draw some focus to the war of terrorism and getting our economy going,'' said Maj. Jon Rabine, 34, who trains pilots. ''He's made a good effort to get both parties to focus in that direction. He made a point of talking about an increase in the military budget. That's favorable for us, both in quality of life for our marines and to supply us with the equipment we need to fulfill the mission.''

Few of those interviewed for reactions to Mr. Bush's speech objected to his general call for military readiness, but several people wanted to know more about what his plans meant for other budget priorities.

''I wanted to know a lot more specifics, particularly about what impacts increasing defense spending are going to have on domestic programs,'' said David Doerr, a journalism student at Southwest Texas State University in San Marcos, who described himself as a member of the Green Party. ''I thought the rest of it was just a lot of rhetoric, even though I will admit he's a great politician.''

Mr. Doerr, 22, watched the speech with four other students. While he was disappointed that the president failed to address the fallout from the Enron scandal, Mr. Bush won universal praise from another student, Vanessa Greenwalt, a junior in public relations.

''He's just so confident about everything that he gives you confidence, about the country, about the future, about everything,'' Ms. Greenwalt, 23, said.

When Mr. Bush used the signature phrase, ''Let's roll,'' Ms. Greenwalt raised a fist in the air and yelled, ''Yes! I love Bush!''

Later, she said, ''He stepped down off the pedestal a little when he said that, and brought himself down with the common people, the man on the street.''

''That's a nice sentiment,'' Mr. Doerr agreed.

THE STATE OF THE UNION: PUBLIC RESPONSE
