The United States attorney for Colorado yesterday denied a request that he convene a grand jury to determine whether one student shot to death at Columbine High School in 1999 might have been accidentally killed by a police officer who responded to the mayhem there.

John W. Suthers, the prosecutor, said an examination of ''the most credible evidence available'' provided no reason to believe that anyone but Dylan Klebold and Eric Harris, two Columbine students, were responsible for all the killings -- those of a teacher and 12 students -- before fatally turning their guns on themselves.

''The United States attorney cannot, in good conscience, conclude at this time that there is a reasonable possibility that a federal crime has been committed which would be the proper subject of a federal grand jury investigation,'' Mr. Suthers said in a statement.

The parents of several victims asked Mr. Suthers early in January to investigate whether one student, Daniel Rohrbough, had been killed by a Denver police officer, with the Jefferson County Sheriff's Department engaging in a subsequent cover-up.

The request was based in part on an assertion by Daniel's parents, Brian Rohrbough and Sue Petrone, that a sheriff's deputy, James Taylor, had told them that he saw Daniel shot at a point when, it was later determined, the two young gunmen had already committed suicide. The request was supported by an affidavit in which a woman said the Denver officer, Sgt. Daniel O'Shea, had told her that he might have accidentally killed a student.

But Mr. Suthers said his office had determined that Deputy Taylor had lied to the parents and that whatever Sergeant O'Shea had said to Celene  Marquez, the woman who testified in the affidavit, she did ''not accurately reflect'' his remarks in that testimony.

Further, ''even if we were to accept the Rohrbough family's assertion that he was killed by police,'' Mr. Suthers said, ''there is not a scintilla of evidence to suggest that any such action was willful or intentional, which is the standard for a federal criminal prosecution.''

Mrs. Petrone reacted with anger.

''It disgusts me that no one wants to find out the truth because it might be a cop,'' she said. ''Everybody's lost sight of what our laws are here to do.''

She said the truth would remain hidden until someone with subpoena power investigated.

Of Deputy Taylor, who has denied the account that Daniel's parents attribute to him, Mrs. Petrone said: ''They've already got one cop caught in a lie here. What's to say another one is not going to do that, too?''
