THIS COLD COUNTRY

By Annabel Davis-Goff.

348 pp. New York:

Harcourt. $25.

DUNMAINE is Georgian country house in the depths of County Waterford, Ireland. It is also, as its quite young and quite accidental new mistress discovers, like ''a disabled ship drifting very slowly toward an iceberg.'' Daisy Creed, a 20-year-old English rector's daughter raised on repressed emotions and 19th-century novels, has endured chilblains on a farm in Wales and aristocratic snubs at a Victorian pile in the Lake District, but the ''cold country'' inhabited by the Protestant gentry known as the Anglo-Irish, frozen in conventions mainly suited to self-destruction, is something else again. To make matters worse, Daisy has been introduced to the mysteries of the Anglo-Irish in the least promising time and manner: early in World War II, after a hasty courtship by an attractive but reticent officer named Patrick Nugent, who, despite Ireland's neutrality, is serving in the British armed forces. Patrick is called back to duty only days after their marriage, leaving Daisy to introduce herself to his family and find her own place in a hierarchy that everyone else seems instinctively to understand.

Annabel Davis-Goff's latest novel easily draws on a range of comic traditions: from the broad satire of ''Cold Comfort Farm'' and ''Experiences of an Irish R.M.'' to the mordant wit of the later novels of Molly Keane, not to mention a detour into Dickens when Daisy is ''pondering her financial affairs.'' Yet ''This Cold Country'' is more than an exercise in comic nostalgia; despite some wobbles toward melodrama, it manages to deploy its humor in a serious consideration of the complexities of love and loyalty -- thanks to the appealing complexities of its central character.

Experiencing the war primarily as a great adventure, Daisy begins the novel seeing things in resolute black and white, but as she moves through the Nugents' picturesquely derelict corner of Ireland a mist descends. By the time we leave her, just two years later, the world is almost entirely gray: at 22, Daisy already seems middle-aged. After prolonged exposure to Patrick's friends and family, she has become painfully aware ''that people lived with secrets, with small guilts, with shame.'' The problem is, ''she hadn't thought she would be one of them.''

Admirers of Davis-Goff's previous novel, ''The Dower House'' (a portrayal of the Anglo-Irish in the physically safer but financially no less perilous 1950's), and her memoir of her own Anglo-Irish childhood, ''Walled Gardens'' (a source of ticklish hints about the inspiration for some of her characters), will know to expect the sort of storytelling in which, as the T. S. Eliot quotation that leads off her memoir goes, ''more is heard than is spoken'' -- storytelling, that is, in which social suicide can be committed through the smallest gesture and the contents of a room can be as revelatory as the actions of the people who have assembled (or, more likely, inherited) them.

From the time we meet Daisy, deftly clutching a snappish ferret in one hand and a teacup in the other as she listens to the BBC with Patrick's cousin Rosemary, on whose farm she is serving as a land girl, we are surrounded by decorative details waiting to be decoded as signs of class conflict. Daisy, by virtue of her lack of squeamishness about hunting rats and milking cows, no less than by her boarding-school manners, is higher up on the social scale than her fellow land girl, Valerie, who is revealed, through her choice of shampoo and unwillingness to eat rabbit, as hopelessly suburban. And back at the rectory, in the grimly hilarious depiction of Patrick and Daisy's tension-filled wedding, Daisy's bluestocking mother distills years of soul-squashing parish domesticity by managing to serve ''a meal that was simultaneously burnt and cold.'' But these examples of what Patrick's Aunt Glad would call ''placing'' are just preliminary exercises for the rigors of the main event, when the action shifts to Waterford.

Daisy has already met one of the Nugents' neighbors, a bluff fellow enlistee of Patrick's named Sir Ambrose Sweeney, in an adroitly choreographed sequence of scenes in London -- on an evening when she and Patrick, attempting an illicit premarital rendezvous, are driven from their hotel room and into the underground by a bombing raid. As Daisy will later discover, Ambrose, a hard-drinking bachelor devoted to horses and loose women, is more dangerous than he seems. As are Patrick's sister, the elegant and uncommunicative Corisande (whose sole domestic skill is the making of funeral wreaths), and her equally elegant fiancé, Edmund Crighton, who takes Daisy and her in-laws to a Sunday lunch where the guest of honor is the devilishly charming Sir Guy Wilcox, a founding member of the British Union of Fascists and a fugitive wanted in England for treason.

Only Daisy seems at all horrified to be sitting down to roast beef and potatoes with a notorious traitor. To make matters worse, Sir Guy is eager for her to profit from the impressions he and his wife have gathered in their Irish refuge: ''We both agreed it was terribly important not to let the side down, so we looked up our Somerset Maugham for hints about how not to go native and we change to eat our sardines on toast for dinner. I understand you're English too, Mrs. Nugent -- Emily could give you some pointers, if you like. Otherwise you'll wake up one morning and realize you've stopped washing your hair.''

Sir Guy will feature in the narrative machinery that furnishes Daisy with her opportunity for rebellion and her acquiescence to a compromised life. In the process, Davis-Goff cranks up some heavy-breathing thrillerish suspense and then, not quite in the nick of time, thinks better of it. Fortunately, though, many of the satisfactions of her novel derive less from its plot than from its detours among characters who willfully go their own way. Chief among these is Maud Nugent, Patrick's ancient grandmother (both his parents are dead), nominally the head of the family, whose dwindling resources Corisande has been diverting to the dressmaker and the racecourse. Maud, who had enough mourning for one lifetime in the last war, has taken to her bed for the duration of this one. Mostly silent, seemingly lost in sleep or senility, she is actually ''not dying but hibernating'' and is exquisitely attuned to the subtle rhythms of the household. She is also still enough of an Anglo-Irish dowager to declare, on being carried downstairs to escape a chimney fire, ''Corisande changed the slipcovers. . . . No one told me.''

The family's other dedicated eccentric, Patrick's younger brother, Mickey, is occasionally as badly treated by Davis-Goff as he is by the deliciously imperious Corisande. Slow-witted (but perhaps out of nervousness rather than stupidity), Mickey quietly slips away from his family to the garden (he's building a maze) or the attic (home to ''the largest colony of long-eared bats in Europe,'' of which, Daisy is told, he ''rather makes pets''). In addition, Mickey is provided with a too-convenient enthusiasm for Irish history, allowing Davis-Goff, through his explanations of, say, the Black and Tans or the Wild Geese, to lecture the reader on what lies behind Ireland's tangled wartime politics. Stubbornly, though, Mickey retains his integrity as a character, even when Daisy enlists him in a scheme to accept paying guests as a way of saving Dunmaine from the auction block.

Daisy may not be able to rescue Dunmaine, but she certainly saves the novel. Even at 20, she has the kind of common sense and cleverness that are instantly ingratiating. Better yet, she's self-aware enough to identify the tension between the freedom postwar Britain might afford her and the security and solace she is surprised to find in the insular traditions of the Anglo-Irish. Better still, she's not sufficiently experienced to keep that tension from causing her to question everyone's motives, including her own.

Davis-Goff is particularly good at showing how Daisy's impulsive romantic attachment to Patrick is deflected to his native country and to the home the Nugents treat even more cavalierly than they treat her. Crisply and gracefully, and with her habitual wry empathy, she shows us how Daisy comes to a singular discovery: that while loneliness can contort or destroy her ties to other people, it can have the opposite effect on her feelings about her surroundings. Like Molly Hassard, the heroine of Davis-Goff's previous novel, Daisy draws ''from inanimate objects the pleasure and reassurance that should have come from love.'' It's even sadder and more convincing, then, that as the novel draws to a close, Daisy looks into her mirror one evening and suddenly realizes that she has acquired the protective coloration of adulthood: ''She knew that she still longed for affection but willingness to love no longer showed.''

Alida Becker is an editor at the Book Review.
