ONE of the many short biographies of Amy Meyers that circulate on the Internet claims that her interest in the relationship between art and science began with her dissertation at Yale.

But Mrs. Meyers will tell you that her fascination started long before that, as a child at the dinner table. She would watch and listen as her father, a scientist who was one of the founders of the Centers for Disease Control in Atlanta, drew parasites on napkins to illustrate his work of the day. The connection between art and science -- between her father's detailed drawings and those unappetizing parasites -- was as natural to the young girl as a review of state capitals might be to another family.

Mrs. Meyers did not pursue parasite drawing. She did follow the art of naturalists closely, though, and her pursuit has taken her to one of the most lofty aeries of the arts in the world, the Yale Center for British Art. She is the center's new director, and is the first woman to lead it.

Those who visit the Yale Center, whether for sheer delight in its varied exhibitions or for scholarly research, are often awed by the depth of its holdings. Philip Kopper, an independent author and publisher in Maryland, was seeking illustrations for a book on animals of the Shetland Islands. He had heard of one such illustrated work, a landmark publication by a 19th-century British agriculture professor David Low. Mr. Kopper searched the globe for it. He was about to give up when he thought to drop by the Yale Center.

''There were two copies,'' he said. ''Later on, I found a copy in England. Can you imagine -- I found two copies at the Yale Center, and one copy in all of Britain? When you want to know something about British art in America, you go to the Yale Center.''

Mrs. Meyers was in New Haven for a visit to the Yale Center recently, and she glided out of her new office into its halls in a crisp blue suit, the first director to pound the floors in high heels. She officials begins her duties on Sept. 1 when she will replace Patrick McCaughey,an Australian whose five-year term was set to expire this summer. He announced unexpectedly in March that he was leaving in June, and gave no reason.

Mrs. Meyers is clearly at home among the scores of revered artworks that Paul Mellon bestowed upon the center when he founded it: the spirited horses and their stiff-backed riders, the pastoral scenes of the English countryside, the portraits of proper British families peering out from their frames.

Before Mr. Mellon began collecting British art in earnest, after World War II, ''British art, like British food, was regarded as par-boiled and boring,'' Mr. Kopper said. The Yale Center has changed much of that perception, with a library that rivals the depth and breadth of those in Britain, and a colleciton of 17th- to 20th-century art n that scholars say is second only to Tate Britain, the national museum of British art in England.

Mrs. Meyers approach to art is as spirited as the framed fillies on the center's walls. If exuberance was all that was needed, she would have been a natural choice for the Yale Center years ago. But detailed résumés are required in the higher echelons of art administration, and the new director has built one that is more than eight pages. One doctorate, two master's degrees from Yale, an undergraduate degree from the University of Chicago.

She is encyclopedic in her knowledge of art, including British art, coming from the Henry E. Huntington Library, Art Collections and Botanical Gardens in San Marino, Calif., where she has served as curator of American Art. Although the Huntington is not often mentioned in nightly dinner-table conversations on the East Coast, it is well-known among art scholars and holds a highly regarded collection of British and French art of the 18th and 19th century.

Mrs. Meyers also has worked at the Corcoran Gallery of Art and the National Gallery of Art, both in Washington, has taught at six colleges and universities, organized symposiums, written more than a dozen papers, collaborated with several other museums and galleries on exhibitions, and has become known as a builder of museum collections. She is moving to the New Haven area this summer with her 8-year-old daughter and her husband, Jack Meyers, who is deputy director of the Getty Grant program.

''Amy walks into the British Museum, everybody knows who she is,'' said Faya Causey, an administrator at the National Gallery of Art in Washington. ''Everybody in the architectural world knows her, and in gardening too. How can you pack that much into one person? This is what you see in a 60-year-old, not one below 45.''

Focus helps, as does a specialty. Mrs. Meyers is known in art circles for her expertise in the British naturalist interpreters of America.

It is not a stuffy scholarship, though, but rather one that is imbued with a sense of wonder. When Mrs. Meyers was in first grade, her family moved to London when her father began working for the Royal Laboratories. He worked at Mill Hill, a former estate north of London, and often brought his daughter to play about the grounds of Mill Hill.

Years later, when Mrs. Meyers was working on her dissertation, ''Sketches from the Wilderness: Changing Conceptions of Nature in American Natural History Illustration, 1680-1880,'' she was reading the letters of a wealthy 18th-century cloth merchant, Peter Collinson. Keenly interested in botany, Mr. Collinson had served as a conduit for specimens and seeds from throughout the world into England. After a while Mrs. Meyers noticed that Mr. Collinson's letters were coming from Mill Hill.

''He had owned Mill Hill, and I had been running around on his grounds as a child,'' she said. ''Many of the specimen trees that were planted there would have been from the seeds that were part of the global trade. The world can be such a tiny little place.''

Mrs. Meyers brings to Yale hopes that the center will combine with the Paul Mellon Center in London to increase their strength as study centers in British art and culture. The Yale Center already is distinctive in that it is part of a major university and sited on its campus. Mrs. Meyers calls it ''the connective tissue'' that makes the center highly accessible to students and scholars alike. And the center differs from municipal art museums in that ''they don't have at their heart the idea that scholarly research can drive the museum,'' Mrs. Meyers said.

So Paul Mellon might not have cared if the public came: He was interested in scholarly research, and wanted his collection to be well used and well cared for. But the center is a gallery and museum too, drawing thousands each year to view its exhibitions.

''I think she'll be terrific,'' said Philip Conisbee, senior curator at European paintings at the National Gallery of Art. ''Her lively and warm personality will stand her in good stead when it comes to fund-raising and dealing with academic and other museum colleagues. In fact, I think she will invigorate the place just by virtue of her personality.''
