With his campaign for governor of California in desperate need of money, Bill Simon Jr. has dismissed almost a third of his staff and hired a pair of longtime political consultants to improve his chances against the Democratic incumbent, Gov. Gray Davis.

Simon campaign officials said today that the moves were needed to help their candidate, a Republican businessman in his first run for office, offset a summer of television advertisements by Mr. Davis. Even more spots are expected after Labor Day, when voters start paying closer attention.

''This signifies that in the post-Labor Day campaign, the Simon organization will be lean and very mean,'' said Sean T. Walsh, a state Republican strategist and campaign adviser. ''We are going to take on Gray Davis in a very aggressive and direct way.''

Mr. Davis's television campaign has been made possible by his six-to-one advantage in fund-raising. Through the last reporting period, ending in late June, Mr. Davis had $31.6 million in cash to $5 million for Mr. Simon.

Mr. Simon has had the added burden of defending himself on a variety of recent issues. They included his reluctance to release his income tax returns, and a jury award of $78 million against his family business for defrauding a former partner.

Aides to Mr. Simon said the dismissal of about 30 campaign workers would free up about $1.5 million for an intensified television campaign to start around Labor Day. They also said that hiring Ed Rollins and Larry McCarthy, the two consultants, would help toughen the candidate's image.

Mr. Rollins, based in New York, is a familiar face in California political circles. He most recently advised one of Mr. Simon's primary opponents, Bill Jones, the California secretary of state, and in 1994 ran the losing Senate campaign of Michael Huffington. As an unpaid adviser to Bob Dole's 1996 presidential campaign, Mr. Rollins resigned after using an anti-Jewish slur at a San Francisco political roast to refer to two California Democratic congressmen.

Mr. McCarthy, based in Washington, helped produce a television spot for Vice President George Bush in the 1988 that referred to a convicted murderer, Willie Horton, to suggest that Mr. Bush's Democratic opponent, Gov. Michael S. Dukakis of Massachusetts, was soft on crime.

In a letter to donors on Wednesday, John Herrington, the Simon campaign chairman, said the changes reflected the need ''to deploy the maximum amount of resources into our paid media effort.''

The changes in the Simon campaign this week are the latest in a series of fresh starts. Since Mr. Simon won the Republican primary in March, for example, he has had three campaign managers.

''This is a campaign in disarray,'' said Allan Hoffenblum, a Republican consultant not involved with the race. ''No one is convinced that Gray Davis has done anything but a poor job as governor, but the Simon campaign has been unable to define him as a reasonable candidate, and he has been reeling for so many negative stories about him.''

To some Democrats, Mr. Simon has appeared so weak that they expect a surge in Republican financial support in the lieutenant governor race, where Bruce McPherson, a Republican state senator, is running against the Democratic incumbent, Cruz Bustamante. In California, candidates for governor and lieutenant governor run separately.
