WE could have blamed it on the rain. (The monsoon season was inching its way out.) We could have blamed it on fatigue (a marathon of long-haul flights). But if my husband and I became food-obsessed slackers in Bali, we really had only ourselves to blame -- and the kitchens at two hotels where we spent a week in early April.

Yes, we straggled out for bursts of sightseeing and shopping and a few restaurant meals, but they never measured up to what we could get just steps from our room. Then again, maybe the room had something to do with it.

Encouraged by some tempting discounted rates, we had booked three nights each at the Chedi, in the Ayung Valley, outside the central hill town of Ubud, and at the Serai, a beach-front affiliate on the eastern coast near Candidasa. (Just recently, we learned that these two hotels and their management group parted company. They have new names, but the local staff, we were told, remains the same -- and so, of course, do their prime locations.)

The Chedi was very chic and very private, the Serai more open and expansive, so together they promised a yin-yang contrast.

The Chedi seemed designed for the world weary (a single television in a corner of the library, a well-stocked bar near the infinity pool, a full-service spa), while the Serai, although nicely laid out for serious loafing, also catered to those for whom the world is never enough (mountain bikes for rent, an outrigger canoe on call and an itinerary of guided treks that included a four-hour climb to the summit of Mount Agung, departing at 2 a.m. to catch the sunrise). We were more interested in sunsets.

An hour north of the airport and the multilane highways and modern sprawl of southern Bali (a good chunk of which, an Australian acquaintance had suggested, is to her countrymen what Tijuana is to Californians), the Chedi is tucked into the side of a steep, jungly gorge and resembles a secluded stone-and-thatch village -- admittedly, a pretty upscale village. Mossy and misty and low-slung, it's the sort of place that manages to be both elegant and cozy.

The two-story main buildings burrowed into the hillside in an arrangement that could have produced a honeycomb of dank caves but instead yielded a series of shady lairs. Our room was small, but nicely fitted out with wooden paneling and built-in cabinets, rather like a well-designed stateroom -- except for the teak-ceilinged outdoor shower at the back, with its own grotto of a garden, and the little terrace out front, surrounded by waist-high, ivy-covered walls. In other words, an ideal den for high-end hobbits.

Breakfasts (included in the room rate) were lavish. Here Continental did not, as it so often does, translate as mingy. In fact, this Continental breakfast was almost too generous: a gigantic fruit plate, a big bowl of granola with yogurt and fruit, an assortment of pastries, a large custom-blended fruit drink (pineapple, orange and ginger was a favorite) and ample refills of excellent coffee. Also on the Chedi menu was a breakfast sandwich with a fried egg, smoky ham and Jarlsberg cheese with pepper, coriander and chili relish. My husband, John, who won't get within 10 feet of a McMuffin, ate two of them.

To fill in the time between meals, we took the free van service (which runs from midmorning until about 10:30 p.m.) into Ubud, about 20 minutes away. Strung out along a surprisingly long and sometimes steep main road, the town is packed with museums and temples and galleries -- and more shops than even the most dedicated browser could cover ( I tried), as well as a crafts market for those who don't have the time or inclination to explore the neighboring villages, each of which has its own particular specialty.

In Ubud, you can buy tickets to performances of traditional dances and gamelan music and book excursions to farther-flung temples and tourist sites. Or you can hire a car and driver from the hotel, as we did on another day, for $15 an hour. We set off on a whirlwind tour, but (perhaps fittingly) just as we finished exploring Pura Tirta Empul, a temple with a 1,000-year-old sacred spring, the rain began in earnest.

Luckily, the Chedi has a soothing wine list. Import duties send most wine prices skyward, but the hotel offers a few specials: a nice 1999 Alexis cabernet sauvignon, for example, was about $14. We further consoled ourselves with minced prawn and lemongrass brochettes, lacquered duck breast, roasted sea scallops with barbecued prawns, and a parfait of caramelized banana, honey and almond praline.

The rain continued on and off, so we had plenty of time, the next night, for a Balinese version of the traditional Indonesian rijstaffel, a kind of smorgasbord of rice, meat and vegetable dishes, and for lunch a stir-fry of chicken, shrimp and egg noodles in a spicy coconut and yellow curry sauce and another of Hokkien noodles with five-spice chicken, black beans and asparagus. Is it any wonder that when I wandered over to the spa, I wound up being scrubbed first with coconut and then with shredded carrots?

The Chedi may feel private even when it's booked solid, but the high-roofed, open-air dining pavilion, approached up a flight of steps lined with lanterns and providing a view out over the pool and the river valley, couldn't have been more than a third full. Our fellow guests seemed to be mostly Japanese and Australian, although we detected a smattering of French, German and British accents.

Occasionally -- on the streets of Ubud, at the Denpasar airport, around the hotel pools -- we heard American voices, but rarely enough so that we weren't surprised when a waiter at a lovely but very empty restaurant in Candidasa said we were the first Americans he'd met all year. The State Department's warning ''to defer nonessential travel to Indonesia,'' which is predominantly Muslim, appears to have affected Bali -- where the distinctive blend of Hindu and Buddhist worship coexists with extensive tourism -- particularly hard. Reassuringly, the department's consular information sheet also reports that ''Bali has been largely free of the disturbances seen in other parts of Indonesia.''

The peace and quiet at the Chedi were echoed an hour's drive east at the Serai, which sits on a green lawn in a grove of coconut palms just beyond a rocky beach. There, too, the architecture is all stucco and thatch, but everything seems lighter and airier, with two-story buildings arranged around a sun-dappled swimming pool. Our room, on the second floor, decorated in shades of beige and brown with pink-and-black checkered silk pillows, was sparer than the room at the Chedi (in fact, the bathroom was almost spartan), but the balcony, with a large built-in daybed, was the ultimate creature comfort: perfect for reading or napping or zoning out to the sound of the surf.

Investigating the room, we flicked on the television and suddenly found ourselves watching a live broadcast from London of the Queen Mother's coffin being carried to Westminster: the stiff-upper-lip British counterpart to a colorful funeral procession we'd just passed in a village in central Bali. Retreating to the bar, we got acquainted with a drink called a Serai cooler (gin, ginger cordial, mint and tonic water) that performed a similarly subversive take on that old colonial standby, the gin and tonic.

The Serai is known for its food. With a bit of notice, you can sign up for cooking classes, and the driver we hired the next day (for $10 an hour) took us along a rice-paddy route through the hills that's part of a more extensive package available to serious students of Balinese cuisine.

Staying in path-of-least-resistance mode, we simply trolled the East Bali section of the hotel menu, full of small plates to share: spiced pork with coconut and lemongrass; grilled chicken in spicy chili and tomato sauce; a curry of tofu, tempeh and quail egg; and green vegetables tossed in a spice paste called Balinese bumbu. The dessert, a grapefruit crème brûlée, might have stretched the Balinese label a bit but, as with the Bali ginger cake, it was an entirely forgivable sin. And so was the bakery basket at breakfast (muffins, croissants, butter almond kuchen, homemade banana jam)

The only disappointment in three days of Serai meals came at tea: the complimentary afternoon tea, served either at poolside or in our room, amounted to a tea bag in a thermos, with a few tired sweets.

East Bali, around the Serai, is a scuba-diving center, but it's also home to cool, pool-studded water palaces built by local rajahs, as well as temples and craft villages (the region is famous for its ikat weaving). You can drive inland for a visit to Bali's largest temple complex, Besakih, and if the weather cooperates, have lunch high up on the ridge leading to volcanic Mount Batur, with views of the lake far below. (The hotel can send you off with a box of sandwiches, biscuits, fruit and soft drinks, a more promising option than the tourist restaurants on the Mount Batur road.)

The spa at the Serai, like the one at the Chedi, is run by Mandara, but has a more limited array of treatments and is far less luxurious, stashed in a couple of converted hotel rooms. My spa sampler was competently delivered and reasonably priced (a Balinese massage and half-hour facial came to $45, with tip), but there was something a little disconcerting about listening to other patrons arriving on the outside of the sliding glass door. And showering in a tiny, utilitarian hotel bathroom put something of a damper on my blissed-out post-massage mood.

It was nothing, though, to rival the thud of re-entry the next morning, when the hotel van collected us for the two-hour journey back to the airport. As the ramshackle villages of East Bali gave way to the larger and larger towns of the coast road and then to the mini-malled, fast-food-infested capital, Denpasar, I found myself unexpectedly energized -- with a desperate urge to hurry back to my daybed at the Serai.

And I found myself wishing that we'd taken our trip just a little later, in time for Bali's celebration of Nyepi, the lunar new year, for which monster-shaped floats were being constructed in open sheds throughout the island. New Year's Day itself is a day of silence. Businesses are shuttered and everyone, including hotel guests, stays indoors. The airport closes down, so nobody can come -- or go. Now that's my idea of a perfect holiday.

A couple of slices of paradise

On Aug. 1, the Chedi in Ubud and the Serai in Manggis, near Candidasa, switched management from the Singapore-based General Hotel Management group to Alila Hotels and Resorts, which also owns the new Alila Hotel in Jakarta. The local staff and management are expected to remain the same.

The hotels may be contacted directly (Bali is 12 hours ahead of New York) or through their United States representative, Heston Associates, 7 Dey Street, New York, N.Y., 10007; (212) 732-4747, fax (212) 587-1580; e-mail, HestonInc@aol.com.

The Chedi, now the Alila Ubud, is about 1 hour 15 minutes from the Denpasar airport, at Desa Melinggih Kelod, Payangan, Gianyar 80572, Bali; (62-361) 975-963, fax (62-361) 975-968. The hotel has 60 rooms and suites, a restaurant with 24-hour service, a poolside restaurant and bar, a swimming pool, a meeting room, a fine-art gallery, health spa, library, television lounge and boutique. Village trekking and bicycling excursions are also offered.

The Serai, now the Alila Manggis, is two hours from the Denpasar airport, at Buitan, Manggis, Karangasem 80871, Bali; (62-363) 41011, fax, (62-363) 41015. There are 56 rooms and suites, a restaurant with room service, a swimming pool, a boutique, spa treatments, and a cooking school. Village trekking, bicycling and diving excursions are also offered.

Booking through Heston (which also handles Alila's properties), we paid $1,331 for six nights' lodging, airport transfers, land transfers between the resorts, daily breakfast and afternoon tea. This fee also included local taxes and 10 percent service charge. Nonpackage rates at the Alila Ubud start at $260 night; at the Manggis, they start at $155.

ALIDA BECKER

ALIDA BECKER is an editor for The New York Times Book Review.
