The sun shined and the fans filed in as baseball backed away from the abyss today, forging a new labor agreement that saved the remainder of the 2002 season and even managed to keep every game on today's schedule intact, starting with this afternoon's Cubs-Cardinals contest at the sport's great old reliable, Wrigley Field.

And to Wrigley they came, with more than 36,000 fans crowding in to watch the teams, who comprise one of baseball's best rivalries, go at it without the threat of a work stoppage hanging over everyone's heads. Amid the blue skies, the scent of hot dogs, the snap of another icy can of beer, and in the distance, the sight of sailboats drifting on Lake Michigan, there was Michael Ulbrict, 31, toting a huge white poster with a handwritten message: ''It's a beautiful day for a ballgame.''

''I'm just glad to be here,'' said Ulbricht, a self-proclaimed diehard Cubs fan -- which is another way of saying a frustrated Cubs fan -- who had planned some time off from work months ago so he could attend today's game.

Ulbricht did not know then that the fate of today's game would not be resolved until late in the morning, when the agreement was finally reached. He did know that he didn't care about the ''politics'' behind the deal, only that it was a beautiful day for baseball. ''There is a God,'' he said.

Some fans, like Lynn Leake, of St. Louis, exhibited more than a little bit of faith in showing up today. While the season still hung in the balance and the two sides negotiated through the night in Manhattan, Leake, some of his friends and his son, Wesley, 14, loaded up at about 6 a.m. for the five-hour drive to Chicago, believing that a strike would be averted and the game would be played.

''I didn't even go to bed last night,'' Leake said. ''I stayed up all night listening to ESPN. We had faith.''

Still, he admitted that there were at least a few doubts and that everyone in his group wore their ''civilian clothes'' rather than their Cardinals jerseys -- just in case. When they arrived at Wrigley, they learned the good news. ''So we changed in the parking lot,'' Leake said, laughing. Then he and his entourage found their seats in the upper deck, behind home plate, beaming and cheering as the game got under way.

But Leake had some misgivings, too, an indication of just how close the sport had come to driving away some of its loyalists with what would have been the ninth work stoppage in the last 30 years.

''If they had struck for even one day, I would have been done,'' Leake said.

Three hundred miles away, outside Comerica Park in downtown Detroit where fans were lining up to buy tickets for tonight's game against the Chicago White Sox, the longtime Tigers loyalist Bob Griswold echoed Leake's warning, saying that if the players had gone on strike he would have written baseball off indefinitely.

''I wouldn't come back for years,'' said the 37-year-old Griswold, who lives in Farmington Hills, Mich. ''Until I have kids of my own and they say, 'Daddy take me to a game.' ''

Even then, Griswold said, ''I'd probably have taken them to a minor league game first. ''They were cognizant enough to realize that if they went on strike this time they would have potentially destroyed the game,'' Griswold added, in reference to the players. ''At least they came around and they realized that they are not bigger than the game.''

At Wrigley, the crowd was actually a few thousand short of the nearly 40,000 the Cardinals and the Cubs sometimes squeeze into the park, and empty green seats could be spotted everywhere from the box seats to the cheaper upper-deck sections. It seemed to suggest that something was a little amiss, either fan resentment because of the threat to the season or simple fan uncertainty over whether today's game would actually take place.

Joseph McHale, 56, even said the sales of his $1 program were slow.

''I had a feeling they weren't going to strike,'' McHale said. ''But when millionaires get together with billionaires, who knows what could happen? In the long run, if there is a strike, it's the small guy that always suffers. I'm glad they settled up.''

It was a feeling echoed elsewhere.

In Phoenix, Bryan Gorman, a supporter of the world champion Arizona Diamondbacks, said the news that the season had been saved was fine with him, and that he was ''glad the Diamondbacks have a chance to win another World Series.'' Other Diamondbacks fans seemed to share his sentiment; the team sold 2,500 tickets for this weekend's series against San Francisco in the two hours after the deal was announced.

In Cleveland, at Jacobs Field, staff workers as well as visitors waiting to tour the stadium focused on the television monitors this morning, waiting to hear whether a deal was indeed a deal. One worker expressed relief when the news came.

''What would we have done?'' she said. ''There'd be no baseball.''

Howard Owens, 47, visiting Cleveland from Toronto with his wife and two daughters, said he was happy the players would keep playing.

''I think they've been squabbling over how big a piece of the pie they can get while ignoring the fact that the pie is shrinking,'' Owens said. ''A lot of kids have lost interest in baseball. I hope this is a new era of enlightenment.''

In New York, where heckling is sometimes second nature, Commissioner Bud Selig heard it from some disgruntled fans, who offered insults instead of congratulations as he walked along Park Avenue to a news conference to announce the agreement.

''I don't look unhappy, I hope,'' he said.

Meanwhile, at Wrigley, the sounds of baseball filled the afternoon. Before the game, the Chicago Cubs Quintet played as the turnstiles clicked. Inside the ballpark, there was the call of ''Cracker Jack,'' the piping of the organ and the ritual seventh-inning Wrigley Field serenade of ''Take Me Out to the Ballgame.''

And on the field, the Cardinals, who are probably headed to the playoffs, were too much for the Cubs, who are going nowhere, with St. Louis prevailing, 6-3, behind a first-inning, three-run homer by Albert Pujols.

Taking it all in in the lower deck behind home plate was Carl Voss, 75, of Batavia, Ill., who said he grew up coming to ballgames at Wrigley.

He and his wife, Elaine, were among 22 senior citizens who traveled together to the game. Voss said there were about a dozen no-shows in his group and said he suspected that some of those who did not come were harboring bitter feelings that wealthy players could end up on strike. He said it was a feeling he could understand.

''At times I wish they would go on strike so they could learn their lesson,'' Voss said. ''I was mad. But you can't beat the beautiful ballpark.''

BASEBALL
