A tornado injured dozens of people on Monday and damaged as many as 100 buildings here, and residents returned today to a town devastated by an estimated $20 million in damage.

Worn and wearied, Geraldine Pratt swept dust and glass on her sun porch, where bamboo shades once hung in the windows. The shades and the glass were gone.

Ms. Pratt, 76, had just returned home from an outing when the tornado hit about 4:30 p.m. Glass shattered, plaster crashed and trees snapped, she recalled at her home today as repair crews with buzz saws worked to clear the debris outside.

''I was hanging on to the doorknob in there going to the basement,'' she said, ''but I couldn't get the basement door open. So I just hung on.''

On Monday, her porch furniture was hanging in trees, both chimneys of her white-frame house were destroyed, the trees she had planted in her backyard over the last 43 years were ruined and all that remained of her garage was a concrete slab.

Gov. Scott McCallum declared Rusk County, which includes Ladysmith, and nearby Taylor County in northwestern Wisconsin disaster areas, making them eligible for state aid. The authorities here said they also were seeking federal assistance. The Wisconsin National Guard was expected to arrive in Ladysmith on Wednesday morning to help with the cleanup.

Many in this town of 4,000 felt lucky that everyone had survived.

''It's almost impossible to take it in, but I can't let it bother me too much because I'm fine'' Ms. Pratt said. ''I didn't get hurt. I guess that's important. I want to be around a few more years.''

The authorities reported that at least 60 people were injured, most suffering cuts and bruises.

After the storm, emergency officials went door to door, searching for victims, including two residents who initially had been unaccounted for. They were later found, officials said.

Sherri Williams, a registered nurse at Rusk County Memorial Hospital, where more than 30 people were treated and released, said that given the level of damage, she had expected far worse.

''We were certainly geared up to have more serious injuries,'' Ms. Williams said. ''We're fortunate to have only minor injuries.''

The tornado snaked through the central business district and some residential areas, covering an area about 14 blocks long and four blocks wide. A spokeswoman for the county estimated damages at $20.8 million -- $13.9 million to business and $6.9 million to residential property.

City officials said 26 businesses and 17 homes were destroyed. In addition, 94 homes and 77 businesses had minor to major damage, the authorities said. Among the casualties was a Baptist church and a water tower.

The American Red Cross and the Salvation Army were operating a shelter opened at a school in nearby Bruce, officials said. A curfew from 8 p.m. to sunrise remained in effect for Ladysmith.

Volunteers and city crews worked into the night to clear houses and cars of trees and debris. They covered windows and removed dangling tree limbs or sawed down trees that were severely damaged and lay in waste.

There were houses with shattered roofs. Broken glass lined streets, and trees lay in front yards. State Police officers directed traffic on Highway 8, where streets were blocked.

Some residents, like Ms. Pratt's daughter, Emilie Pratt, 38, tried to absorb the devastation, standing outside her mother's home. Emilie Pratt lives on the south side of town, where there was no damage.

She was returning from an out-of-town trip on Monday when she learned that a tornado had touched down near her mother's house.

''I couldn't even look'' the daughter said. ''My husband said, 'Your mom's house is pretty much gone.' ''

Both mother and daughter were still grappling this evening with the loss. Inside the home, some of the antique china that Ms. Pratt has collected for many years lay broken, and part of her ceiling had collapsed. In the yard, all that remained of an apple tree was a stump. A spruce, a dogwood and a pine had also been crippled.

''I just feel so bad because we loved all these trees,'' the elder Ms. Pratt said. ''Most of them we planted. You just can't take it in. I was awake most of the night trying to figure out what really happened, what could have happened or what would have happened.''

The memories of her harrowing moment, clinging to the doorknob, linger.

''I was there thinking, Is the house going to fall in? Is it going to blow away? And is my gas going to explode? You think of all those things in just seconds,'' Ms. Pratt said, standing in her yard. ''That's why I say I'm grateful I'm here.''
