Making the grandest entry into the Boston area real estate market in memory, the Swiss drug maker Novartis has leased 764,000 square feet of costly lab space, much of it for 45 years. It will invest about $750 million to develop, equip and staff what will be the Novartis Institute of Biomedical Research.

The complex will supplant the lead role of the company's plant in Basel as the research headquarters for Novartis, whose $115 billion market capitalization makes it Switzerland's biggest business and places it among the world's top six pharmaceutical companies.

In choosing Cambridge as the site for the 1,000-worker lab after a worldwide search, the company bypassed Switzerland, where it has a 1,400-employee lab and corporate roots that reach back almost 100 years; New Jersey, where it has 350 researchers in Summit, East Hanover and Florham Park; California, where it has 200 researchers in La Jolla; and Japan with about 150, said Jeorg Reinhardt, director of global product development for Novartis. All of these labs will continue to operate as research plants, a company spokesman said.

''Cambridge is one of the most excellent scientific centers in the world,'' Dr. Reinhardt said. ''It has the best minds in a diverse array of scientific fields, proximity to top hospitals, U.S. markets and Europe; it's no problem to convince scientists to relocate here from Basel or New Jersey, and there's an enormous number of new biotech companies we can partner with.''

The company signed the 45-year lease three weeks ago and has an option to buy a 509,000-square-foot former candy factory at 254 Massachusetts Avenue. In May, it took a 15-year lease with renewal options on a 255,000-square-foot lab building under construction at 100 Technology Square. Both sites are adjacent to the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, close to Harvard University, amid the region's thickest concentration of biopharmaceutical companies and a few miles from Harvard Medical School hospitals.

Since biotechnology labs usually cost at least $350 a square foot to build and fit out for tenants, and must then be filled with state-of-the-art equipment and researchers who earn six-figure salaries, the magnitude of this move has impressed even the most seasoned real estate professionals here. ''It's the biggest lease deal I've ever seen,'' said William McCall of McCall & Almy Real Estate Advisors, a 43-year industry veteran.

But since biotechnology is only about 7 percent of the Greater Boston commercial property market, ''It's not our savior,'' he cautioned.

The office market is slogging through a vacancy rate, including sublease space, of about 21 percent and average asking rents of $31 a square foot annually, down from $43 in 2000, according to Spaulding & Slye Colliers Research.

Throughout this dark down cycle, however, the bright spot has been the biotechnology niche clustered in Cambridge, where the lab vacancy rate is 3.8 percent, excluding sublease space. Rents for laboratory space are steady at about $60 a square foot and several major projects are in development. Since 1999, the supply has more than doubled, from 2 million square feet to 5.6 million square feet, with another 2.1 million square feet in construction, according to the city.

Speaking of the Novartis move, Joseph T. Maguire, director of Real Estate for M.I.T., said: ''It's the first time in 15 years that I've seen a company swallow so much space in one bite and transplant its research headquarters here.'' The school owns 100 Technology Square, designed by Stubbins Associates, where construction crews are working 20 hours a day to be ready for Novartis's occupancy in April.

M.I.T. owns 3 million square feet of commercial space that it rents out, 65 percent to biotech tenants. It also holds the ground lease on the 2.3 million square feet of space in the 12 buildings at University Park, a mile from Technology Square. University Park abuts the former factory of the New England Confectionary Company, known as Necco, which is to become Novartis's other site here.

''From candy to chromosomes,'' is how Arthur P. Solomon, the owner of the real estate development and investment firm DSF Group, likes to describe the deal that he spent six months negotiating with Novartis for the factory that Necco built in 1926.

Almost an entire city block, the 3.3-acre property comprises the main six-story building, which is to undergo a restoration outside and gut renovation inside; a garage that will be enlarged for 430 cars and a power plant building that has been decommissioned and will be expanded so it can serve as a cafeteria and auditorium. The rooftop water tower painted to suggest Necco's pastel candy wafers, a familiar Cambridge landmark, will be retained.

While legions of developers have butted horns with the powerful Cambridge historic preservation community in this onetime industrial city that is known for its stringent development controls, Mr. Solomon has found a glittery lining to the clouds of complexity that hover over historic restoration projects such as this.

Since he is renovating rather than putting up a new lab, the building is larger than current zoning would allow. The construction process is also faster; his tenant can occupy the space about 20 months from now, rather than the 36 months that it would take to develop a new building.

While the onetime candy factory has access to modern utilities and fiber optic telecommunication cables, its old poured concrete rather than steel structural members (beams, columns, floors) make it more fireproof and able to support heavier loads than most newer buildings. Its 13-foot ceilings afford room for pipes that carry air, water and gases and its 8-foot windows let in ample light and provide inspiring views, said Edward T. Tsoi of Tsoi/Kobus & Associates, who designed the project.

Mr. Solomon won designation of the building as a national historic site, which enables him to apply for historic tax credits once the job is done, offsetting some of the approximately $175 million development cost. Also, in exchange for a below market rent, Novartis will finance the construction loan.

The old factory was bought for about $85 million in 2000 by the Technology Real Estate Fund, which Mr. Solomon manages, with the intention of finding a tenant from the telecommunications industry. When that prospect faded, Mr. Solomon reset his sights on biotechnology.

Mr. Solomon's DSF Group is also developing an 800,000-square-foot factory for Necco in nearby Revere.

The cost to build in this dense urban district rather than in a suburb will add about 30 percent to Novartis's development budget. It must also deal with strict planning and zoning regulations and intense community involvement. But compared with Europe's development process, this is routine, Novartis executives said.

The company's investment here is driven by a desire to escape the complexities of Europe's regulatory systems for the biopharmaceutical industry and to have access to United States talent and consumers. Novartis believes that in Cambridge it can build a richer knowledge base that will yield more new products, faster, to sell to the world's richest, aging customers.

''Twenty years ago, the world's biggest pharmaceutical firms were in Europe,'' Dr. Reinhardt said. ''Today, the best performers have a U.S. sales base. Too few of those companies are European. That's what we have to change.''

COMMERCIAL REAL ESTATE  Correction:  October 24, 2002, Thursday  The Commercial Real Estate column in Business Day on Oct. 9, about the building of a research headquarters by Novartis in Cambridge, Mass., included an erroneous reference from the company to its plans for three laboratories in New Jersey. Novartis will continue research at one of them, not three. The one in Summit will close; the lab in East Hanover will remain open. In Florham Park, researchers perform administrative duties; that site, which is not a laboratory, will stay open.
