THE 1750 William Tully House sits, surrounded by ''No trespassing'' signs, on a narrow strip of land facing the Connecticut River in Old Saybrook's Colonial heart.

''That's our struggle,'' said Louise Tietjen, who has lived down the road from the house for 40 years. ''That house is a pearl.''

The Tully house is one of 32 homes in the town's North Cove Historic District and one of 1,000 houses in the state listed on the National Register of Historic Places. So it was shocking to many district residents when in August the North Cove Historic District Commission, composed mostly of district residents, voted to demolish the boxy white Colonial.

Since then, Ms. Tietjen, her husband, Richard, and a number of district residents have waged a crusade to save the house, one that has embroiled this quiet neighborhood in a vocal debate. ''We're giving it all we've got,'' Ms. Tietjen said, ''and I'm afraid we're losing it.''

The newly formed Friends of the Tully House, of which Ms. Tietjen is the de facto leader, said demolition would remove part of the town's history. They plan to have bagpipers and musketeers at the scene if the wrecking crew comes.

But the commission members who voted for demolition stand behind their decisions, saying they based them on two engineers' reports that determined the house was beyond restoration and claimed it would be unsafe to try salvaging it.

''I agonized over this, believe me,'' said Donna DiBella, a board member who lives two doors down from the house. ''It was not a happy day when we voted.''

North Cove residents are proud of their neighborhood's architectural history and pay attention to details, from outdoor lamps to doorframes, that could upset the character of their district.

Now, as a mid-November demolition deadline approaches, district residents are left wondering: When exactly is a house beyond saving and who decides? And there is no precedent precisely like this one they can turn to for answers.

''I can't think of another building of this importance, of this age, that has been approved for demolition,'' said John. W. (Jack) Shannahan, the state's federal historic preservation officer and the director of the state's historic commission.

From 1969 until last year, the house belonged to Elizabeth Shurts, a friend of the Tietjens. In November of last year, after Shurts's death, the house was sold by her estate. It was originally listed at $1.7 million and was sold for $800,000 to Frank Manafort, who is treasurer of Manafort Brothers Inc., a construction and demolition company with offices in Hartford, Plainville, and Boston. Mr. Manafort lives in East Hampton.

''Their intent was to make it their permanent residence, to have a nice, old home by the river,'' said Mr. Manfort's lawyer, William Childress.

This spring, Mr. Manafort's construction crews began working on some approved changes to the house and came across frame and foundation damage. In early June, Mr. Manafort's architect hired an engineer to assess the house, and later that month, the town's building inspector also looked at the home. Both men drew the same conclusion: the house was not structurally sound and the frame should be removed.

In July the town hired a third engineer form Gibble Norden Champion Brown Consulting Engineers Inc., in Old Saybrook. After reviewing the house, the engineer, James Norden, said 98 percent of the frame was usable, and with ''reasonable effort'' Mr. Manafort could safely salvage the structure.

''It was comfortably lived in for many years,'' said Richard Tietjen, a member of the Friends group. ''This business about it falling apart is sheer sophistry. A canard.''

But on Aug. 19, three out of four voting commission members -- Ms. DiBella, Janet Foisie and Patricia Osborne -- voted to demolish the home. ''Our decisions were made based on the facts presented to us,'' the women later wrote in a local newspaper. They and their supporters also said many of the home's historical elements have long been removed or allowed to deteriorate anyway, and it would be far better for the neighborhood to allow Mr. Manafort to build a near-replica in its place, as he has demonstrated he would with extensive architectural plans.

''Do you try to rebuild with the existing frame, or rebuild the whole house?'' asked Mr. Childress, who lives in the district and whose home was also recently approved for demolition. ''In the end it's the same result.''

''The distinction must be made,'' Mr. Childress added, ''between a historic site and the actual physical characteristics of the structure. Many of the characteristics in place then, aren't now. I don't think the spirit of the history would ever be lost.''

The national register is the Department of the Interior's official inventory of homes, buildings and districts deemed worthy of preservation after a lengthy nomination and review process. According to Mr. Shannahan, a home that is individually listed, like the Tully house, has to have interior and exterior architectural ''integrity'' as well as historic significance, to be included and to remain on the list.

The North Cove Historic District Commission has jurisdiction only over the exterior of the house, while the federal government has jurisdiction over the interior. ''Clearly the interior work has been removed, I'm told it's in storage,'' Mr. Shannahan said. ''But those repairs could be made. If the interior of a house is destroyed, then ordinarily, one would ask whether it should remain on the register. But ordinarily we don't go around looking in people's houses. We're not the preservation police.''

The Friends say it is not just the house that worries them, but the potential for further demolition in the district. ''I'm not doing this because of this one house,'' said Ms. Tietjen, '' I think it's a trend. It's a very strange situation. You've got a historic house in a row of historic houses and you can't save it because of these three adamant women. What's going to happen to little towns like this if this is allowed to happen?''

Robert Welsh was the lone voter against demolition. ''I didn't give much weight to the cost of the repair, it was whether it could be repaired, and it was very clear it could be repaired,'' Mr. Welsh said. ''People who buy historic houses should understand that restoration will be required.''

The state historic commission represents another hope for the Friends of saving the house. According to Mr. Shannahan, the state commission will take up the issue at its next meeting on Nov. 6, and if the commission decides the house is salvageable within ''reason,'' it could vote to take the matter to the attorney general's office, which could file for an injunction.

''At this point and time we haven't come to any conclusions,'' Mr. Shannahan said.

A state law says any citizen has the right to get an injunction preventing the ''unreasonable'' demolition of a national register property.

But, then, what is reasonable? It's doesn't appear to be defined anywhere, Mr. Shannahan said.

The town's historical society has not taken a position on the matter, and the first selectman, Michael Pace, has decided not to consider an appeal of the commission's ruling.

The town's building inspector, Don Lucas, hasn't yet signed off on a demolition permit for the house, because one cannot be issued until 90 days from the commission's approval, according to Michael Cronin, the town's lawyer. In the meantime, town officials are considering whether to move the house after Mr. Manafort offered last week to give the structure to the town if it pays to dismantle it and take it to another site.

So now district residents simply wait.

Despite everything, residents said their battle ultimately will not damage the equanimity of the neighborhood. Ms. Tietjen admitted she felt ''tender'' about the social ramifications of the campaign, but said she still waves hello to everyone she sees, and, they wave back.

''It's a personal thing,'' Ms. DiBella said. ''In the end, we're all going to be neighbors.''

And Mr. Welsh added, ''I may be naïve on this, but I think life goes on.''
