A 1985 consent decree that curtails police monitoring of political groups does not fetter the New York Police Department in its pursuit of terrorists, a group of civil liberties lawyers contended in papers filed yesterday in Federal District Court in Manhattan.

The Police Department's request to scuttle much of the agreement, made in a motion to the court last month, would permit officers to gather intelligence without evidence of criminal activity, a dangerous authority that even the Federal Bureau of Investigation does not have, the lawyers contended.

''They want no rules,'' said Jethro Eisenstein, one of the lawyers who negotiated the consent decree, known as the Handschu agreement, and who opposed the city's motion. ''It is that kind of thinking that led us to bring the lawsuit -- that you can identify large groups of people as a threat and what you ought to do is sic law enforcement on them.''

The city signed the agreement to end a suit over surveillance of political groups in an era of revelations that the F.B.I. and the police in many cities had harassed and intimidated people engaged in controversial political activities.

In petitioning Judge Charles S. Haight Jr. to ease the restrictions, the city argued that they unreasonably prevented the police from using surveillance and undercover officers to monitor terrorists who might never betray criminal intent until it was too late to stop an attack.

''The Handschu guidelines, as they currently exist, are the product of another era,'' Police Commissioner Raymond W. Kelly said.

The city filed an affidavit from David Cohen, the department's deputy commissioner for intelligence and a former Central Intelligence Agency official, contending that American mosques were largely radicalized and that there was no way under Handschu to follow the activities of Muslims who might be planning attacks.

The lawyers who negotiated the agreement said in papers filed yesterday that Handschu would not shackle any legitimate terror investigation. Mr. Cohen had cited instances in which Muslims seemingly engaged in legal activities were found to be connected to terrorism. The lawyers opposing the city said that in those cases, enough evidence of criminal intent existed to investigate them even under Handschu.

''The guidelines would not have interfered with investigation of the Sept. 11 hijackers,'' Mr. Eisenstein said in court papers.

In an interview, Mr. Eisenstein also portrayed Mr. Cohen's characterization of the danger from American Muslims as misguided and a dangerous precedent.

''It's permission to profile,'' Mr. Eisenstein said.

In January 2001, a federal appeals court eased the terms of a consent agreement that limited surveillance and monitoring by the Chicago Police Department, but other cities still have laws against monitoring political groups.

Both sides have asked to make oral arguments, and Mr. Eisenstein said the city had also asked the judge to hear secret evidence.

Gail Donohue, the special assistant to the corporation counsel, confirmed that the city had asked the judge to review a secret affidavit from Mr. Cohen that the plaintiffs would not see.

''It has to do with the argument that we made to the court with respect to how Handschu has restricted the ability to investigate,'' Ms. Donohue said. ''There is information in it that has to be protected.''

The judge has not ruled on whether he will consider the affidavit.
