A federal judge yesterday rebuffed New York City's effort to give secret evidence in its effort to end restrictions on police surveillance of political groups, but he left the door open for the city to return with a more compelling argument.

The police say the rules restrict their terror investigations, and city lawyers want to present their case before the judge in private. When city lawyers appeared in court yesterday, the judge, Charles S. Haight Jr., scolded them for arriving unprepared to present an argument for their request for secret testimony.

City lawyers said they would consult with police officials before deciding their next step.

Gail Donoghue, the special assistant to the corporation counsel, said she was not prepared to argue the legal issues of secret evidence in yesterday's hearing because she thought the judge wanted to discuss alternatives.

The city has asked that officers be freed from limitations imposed by a 1980 consent decree, known as the Handschu agreement, in which the police said they would cease gathering intelligence on ordinary citizens when there is no evidence of a crime.

As an example of the type of antiterrorism surveillance the agreement would prevent, city officials have said it would keep investigators from infiltrating mosques where they believe terrorist acts may be in the planning stages.

David Cohen, the former deputy director of the Central Intelligence Agency who is now deputy commissioner for intelligence at the New York Police Department, has said in court papers that the agreement endangers the safety of New Yorkers, but he offered no specifics. City lawyers said he would do so only if the judge agreed to hear them in chambers, without opposing lawyers present.

The judge suggested some alternatives to that course yesterday, including the possibility that opposition lawyers could hear the evidence and be ordered not to discuss it.

The civil liberties lawyers who filed the original case, and were in court yesterday to argue against the secret evidence, were vehemently opposed to that alternative.

''This is the last case in which class counsel would want to participate in a secret proceeding,'' said Paul Chevigny, a law professor at New York University. ''This is a case in which secret investigation was the issue.''

Judge Haight ordered lawyers for both sides to talk, and to return next Wednesday.
