RITA CONNOR, 37, of Bethel, works during the day as a teacher in the birth-to-3 program at the Danbury Even Start program. But after work three nights a week, she hurries over to K-B Toy Works on Newtown Road in Danbury. There, she stands on her feet for several hours helping customers find Thomas the Tank Engine tracks, Spiderman Monopoly and the latest Yu-Gi-Oh cards, to make a little extra cash for Christmas.

Ms. Connor knows firsthand the difficulty some people have had getting a job -- any job. The program she works for during the day helps educate teenage mothers. Those same young mothers are competing with the Ms. Connors of the world for holiday work, to give them a boost during the biggest spending spree of the year.

''Jobs are very difficult to come by,'' Ms. Connor said. ''The stores are looking this year for people who really want to work, who can commit for a 2 to 10 shift, for example, odd hours. Nowadays, when you get a job, it's very precious.''

Securing holiday help has long been a challenge to large mall retailers in Connecticut, where the work force is better educated and more affluent than average. Even employee discounts of 25 to 30 percent have failed to draw holiday applicants in droves over the years, particularly in the Fairfield County market. Couple that with stores extending their holiday hours, some opening at 6 a.m. and keeping their doors open until midnight. To accommodate this, they ratchet up their employee count threefold.

K-B Toys, for example, gets by with 15 to 18 employees during the year. Once Halloween hits, the manager of K-B's Danbury store, Bill Tamboia, brings on 25 or so more.

This year, he had more applicants for seasonal jobs than in past the five years.

''I don't think the overall retail environment was hiring like they normally would be at this time of year,'' Mr. Tamboia said. ''They were thinking that the fourth quarter wasn't going to turn out for them well. But it all seems to balance out at the end.''

Edward J. Deak, an economics professor at Fairfield University, said upscale mall merchants such as Filene's, Lord & Taylor and Macy's were more selective in their hiring this year.

''The stores were not very optimistic, and I think correctly so,'' he said. ''And although the data seems to contradict this, people are going to spend the same amount they did last year, but they'll be spending it at the Wal-Marts, the Targets, the J. C. Penneys, trying to get more value for their money.''

Executives at Filene's looked at the increased availability of workers and opted not to advertise seasonal jobs in their typical way: by newspaper classifieds. Shoppers at Westfield Shoppingtown in Meriden, formerly the Meriden Square Mall, are greeted by a sign the size of a billboard hanging above the entrance to the Filene's store, with the words ''Now Hiring.'' Inside, small postcards are set by cashier booths, with words luring would-be employees to work at Filene's for the holidays. In turn, the stores were surprised when fewer than the normal numbers filled out applications.

''The feeling is that the economy is worse and we should have more applicants,'' said Robin Riebel, a spokeswoman for Filene's. ''We are not advertising in the same ways; we did less outside recruiting and that made sense. Either way, we had a sufficient number of employees to take care of our seasonal opportunities.''

Smaller retailers bypass new hires in favor of returning high school and college students. The retailers also extend hours for both part-time and full-time employees. Even toy stores -- the privately owned ones, anyway -- tend to avoid taping up ''positions available'' signs in their windows during the holidays.

''We don't hire many people during the holidays because we need people who have a knowledge of what we're selling,'' said Steve Amato of Amato's Toy and Hobby shop in Middletown and New Britain, which does three-fourths of its annual business between Halloween and Easter. ''We have part-timers during the year who we hire with the understanding that they will be available more during this season. In the chain operations, those people are just cashiers. But we need knowledgeable people, and you can't teach somebody what they need to know here in a week.''

Roxanne Coady, owner of R.J. Julia Booksellers in Madison, uses college students who have been chipping in to help for years and know the store.

''Around the edges, the quality of who we have been able to hire has improved, for the holiday season and in general,'' Ms. Coady said. ''I attribute it to two things: It's a weaker economy, instead of the sort of atmosphere where no one would work for less than $500 an hour. Now people have become more practical. We've also seen a post-Sept. 11 thing. This is the kind of place people want to be in to work -- an appealing atmosphere. Here, you feel good about what you're doing. The appeal has become that much more compelling.''

Unemployment in Connecticut is still low compared to the rest of the nation, at 4.2 percent in October compared to 5.7 percent nationally. Retailers come to depend on high school and college students, and at-home parents to fill in the ranks of holiday workers, although teenagers are limited by labor laws and inexperience. Retailers may only hire people 18 or older for work past 10 p.m.

''Retailers are looking for older teens, and people with a little more experience,'' said Michele Mesek, the work force coordinator for the Connecticut Retail Merchants Association.

''They want people who know how to speak with the public. The high school students I deal with don't have that experience.''

So there were more applicants for jobs, but not quite as great a need this year, retailers said.

Mitchell's, an upscale clothing store on the Post Road in Westport, hired six gift wrappers for the Christmas season. Students looking for holiday money applied in abundance, said Tom Maleri, the manager.

''I think there are more people looking to make some extra money,'' he said, ''especially the kids.''
