Nearly two years after federal officials declared the Cicero ''candy store'' officially closed, Betty Loren-Maltese, the former town president, was sentenced today to eight years and one month in prison for helping steal $12 million from a municipal insurance fund.

Ms. Loren-Maltese stood calmly, at times shaking her head and at other times with head bowed, as Judge John F. Grady of Federal District Court here announced her sentence and rebuked her.

''This is a situation where the defendant was given absolute and complete discretion,'' Judge Grady said. ''She was trusted completely. She could do no wrong. It was the wholesale betrayal of the naïve face of a whole town.''

Cicero, which abuts west-central Chicago, has about 85,000 residents.

Ms. Loren-Maltese was convicted of racketeering, wire fraud and mail fraud. In addition to her maximum prison term, she was fined $100,000 and ordered to pay more than $8 million restitution. Judge Grady said she must surrender to the authorities on April 1.

The authorities said much of the stolen money was used to buy a hotel with a golf course in Wisconsin, a horse farm in Indiana and luxury cars.

Before sentencing, Ms. Loren-Maltese, 52, gave a brief emotional statement in which she sought leniency on the grounds that a lengthy prison term would harm her 5-year-old adopted daughter.

''When it comes to my daughter,'' Ms. Loren-Maltese said, ''she is the most important thing to me. I love her and miss her. I believe an adoptive parent loves her child and is even more concerned about them than a natural parent, because they know how lucky they are. I take special care and concern when it comes to my daughter.''

After her sentencing, Ms. Loren-Maltese hurried from the courthouse surrounded by bodyguards and lawyers. She offered no comment.

She was the sixth of seven people convicted last year in the Cicero scandal to be sentenced this week. Michael Spano Sr., a reported organized-crime boss, was sentenced to more than 12 years in prison for his role in the scheme. Emil Schullo, a former chief of police, was given nearly 6 years; Michael Spano Jr., more than 6 years; Bonnie LaGiglio, more than 3 years; and Charles Schneider, a lawyer for Mr. LaGiglio and the elder Mr. Spano, 7 years.

Mrs. LaGiglio's husband, John, is awaiting sentencing. Mr. LaGiglio was the founder of Specialty Risk Consultants, an insurance administrator through which, prosecutors said, the money was funneled from the insurance fund.

A federal jury convicted the seven in August after a 10-week trial.

At the time of the arrests in 2001, law enforcement authorities accused Cicero's municipal officials of turning the city into a personal piggy bank. With the filing of charges, the head of the Chicago office of the F.B.I., Kathleen McChesney, said, ''The Cicero candy store is closed.''

In the months before sentencing, Ms. Loren-Maltese had insisted that a long term would be detrimental for her daughter, but in court papers filed last week prosecutors said Ms. Loren-Maltese's time spent being a parent had been offset by the time spent being a gambler.

Prosecutors said that in the last three years Ms. Loren-Maltese bet nearly $19 million at casinos, mostly in Las Vegas, where she has a second house. In 2000-01, they said, Ms. Loren-Maltese spent nearly 1,600 hours gambling, suggesting that someone other than her was caring for her daughter.

Lawyers for Ms. Loren-Maltese said in court today that the daughter would be placed in the care of a grandmother, 80, who might not live long enough to provide adequate care for the girl.

Judge Grady said that children's welfare was often involved in such cases and that although a child might be adversely affected, it was not enough to minimize the penalty that a parent had to face for a serious crime.

Ms. Loren-Maltese's lawyers also presented the court with a stack of letters from supporters, but those did not help her.

''That's the kind of thing that makes this abuse of trust more severe,'' Judge Grady said.
