SAL DIPILLO is accustomed to being Connecticut's man behind the numbers: Information seekers call Mr. DiPillo, a soft-spoken superviser at the Connecticut Department of Labor, when they want to know statistics for the labor market in the state.

How many people were hired in the retail sector for 2002? He knows immediately. How many people lost their jobs in November? He knows that too, and quickly.

But the one number he didn't have was his own. When his superviser, Roger Therrien, called him into his office the first working day of the new year, Mr. DiPillo was surprised to learn that although he still had a job, he would lose his supervisory position as up this Friday. He had become, unbeknownst to him, yet another body dropping from state budget cuts, which have resulted in layoffs of thousands of state workers. Ouch, he said.

''When my boss called me into his office, I thought, ''Oh gosh, we have to lay somebody off, somebody with the least seniority','' Mr. DiPillo said. ''So I was completely shocked to find out it was me.''

Mr. DiPillo has supervised a staff of nine, the writing and editing of the monthly Connecticut Economic Digest in conjunction with the office of Economic and Community Development, and the monthly news release, the Connecticut Labor Situation. Although he lost his supervisory job, he was able to bump another employee in the statistics department with less seniority to keep a job.

The person he bumped, then bumped somebody else. ''I feel badly about it,'' Mr. DiPillo said. He doesn't know what his new job will be, but it will be for a smaller salary.

''I'm not sure what I'll be doing in the office,'' he said. ''I may be doing this, but for less money. Won't that be interesting?''

He quotes from a recent report by the Center for Economic Analysis at the University of Connecticut, which said that Connecticut ranked second in the nation for efficiency in government employment, trailing only behind New Hampshire for the leanness of its public sector.

''I think that says we're not over-employed,'' he said.

The layoff is even more baffling to Mr. DiPillo because the federal Bureau of Labor Statistics pays for a percentage of the cost of the state labor statistics department in which Mr. DiPillo works.

''Because our office is substantially federally funded, we haven't faced this in the past,'' Mr. DiPillo said, ''so I'm not sure this layoff is going to save the state money.''

Nancy Steffens, a spokeswoman for the labor department, said the whole department was losing about 45 jobs, with a handful coming from statistics. It turns out that the percentage the state contributes to the running of the statistics department was so small it's not even a percentage. The department, as far as the state is concerned, is 92 percent federally funded.

So what's the point of the reshuffling?

''I wish I knew,'' he said.

Actually, there is a point. Marc S. Ryan, the state's budget chief, said the federal money that would have gone to pay for the salaries of the laid-off employees will be redirected to other uses, and not necessarily in the labor department. The state can use the federal money any way it wants.

''Once federal funds are in the state budget, they can be moved around to do other things,'' said Kathleen Harrington, a spokeswoman for the federal Department of Labor, ''as long as the state continues to perform the services required by the federal government.''

Mr. Ryan said he wasn't sure how much money was involved or where it would end up.
