THOUSANDS are losing jobs, the economy is lagging, but, still, houses are sprouting like clover in Connecticut. Yet as home builders rejoice, towns are taking steps -- some extreme -- to figure out how to slow the growth and the strain on their services.

Some towns have gone so far as to put a stop to all new projects by imposing moratoriums on building applications. East Haddam has put in place a six-month moratorium ending in May. Cromwell and Ellington are each considering one. Pomfret established a moratorium on housing subdivisions while its brand-new planning and zoning commission figures out zoning regulations.

Coventry has changed its required building lot size to two acres from one and formed a task force to address residential growth. And in an extraordinary move, it has left vacant a handful of houses it seized because of back taxes rather than have new families move in, figuring the property taxes the properties would bring wouldn't nearly cover the costs of providing services, such as education, to the new owners.

''These are all small steps to enhance land use and control growth,'' said Eric Trott, the town planner of Coventry. ''A lot of drops in the bucket make a full bucket.''

Jim Gibbons, a planner-educator with the University of Connecticut's Center for Land Use Education and Research, said that for years towns have been using the wrong strategy.

''Local commissions thought they were doing such a great thing with residential development, until town officials got hit with hard research that showed the adverse impact of single-family homes,'' said Jim Gibbons, a planner-educator with the University of Connecticut's Center for Land Use Education and Research. ''Cows and trees don't go to school.''

In the past, towns marketed themselves as oases for would-be home buyers in hopes of lengthening their property tax lists and attracting companies that would draw workers into those subdivisions. From the inner ring of suburbs surrounding cities, development pushed out into the countryside, as farmers sold their land to developers.

Moratoriums, of course, can be controversial: Some town planners said they are necessary because town plan and zoning commissions are spending all their time considering applications and none of it reviewing existing regulations to improve them. They said they need time to do that.

''We needed a breather to look at regulations and study land-use patterns,'' said James Ventres, East Haddam's town planner ''Because the planning and zoning commission handles this -- it's not a town vote -- the members can't be going to meetings until 12 o'clock at night and then make rational decisions afterward.''

Yet critics said commissions. often comprising volunteers, are not doing their jobs correctly if they require moratoriums to find the time they need.

''Moratoriums are local officials admitting they are caught with their pants down,'' said Mr. Gibbons, who often runs workshops for planning and zoning commissions. ''I tell them what, by law, their responsibilities are, and they often say, 'we're just volunteers, we don't have the time.' I say to them, 'You really have to take a stab at this or step aside and let someone who will.' A lot of these commissions haven't been doing what they should be doing, with planning, with inventories, with regulations that carry out the plan concept. If you're going to agree to serve on these boards, have a good idea of what's expected of you.''

East Haddam's problems are a microcosm of what is facing many towns. About 6,000 people were living in the town in 1980. About 8,400 live there now. Although many bought houses in new developments on large plots of land, the town is now encouraging developers to build clustered developments -- houses that sit on only a small portion of the available acreage -- to preserve open space. Residents struggle with the newer concepts, though, believing it will alter their way of life.

''I'm an old man, I've been here over 50 years,'' said Edgar H. Bishop, who along with his neighbors is fighting a proposed 22-house cluster development on his street, Petticoat Lane. ''We live on a quiet country road, and this guy wants to put 22 houses in. I realize we'll have development of the town, but people on this street have built homesteads on their property. I built a new house all those years ago, and I'm still sitting on my 25 acres with my pond and I just think this is going to change my style of living.''

The developer, Ralph Gometz, alternated between frustration and bewilderment at the impasse.

''The residents don't want development,'' he said. ''But if they want development, they want a standard subdivision. They are so far behind the times you wonder if they are in this century.''

Residents may be discomfited by the sight of more residents, but the administrators who run the town are even more uncomfortable. East Haddam has almost no commercial tax base. A buyer with two children who bought a 3,000-square-foot house in 2002 paid taxes of $6,500. At a cost of $9,043.19 a year to educate a child in the town's schools, according to the State Department of Education, East Haddam is spending more than $18,000 on education for that one household.

''They're losing money every time somebody with kids moves to town,'' said Mark Branse, a land-use lawyer in Glastonbury. ''And I don't know the answer, although residents think they do. Their answer: To close the doors to town. Now there are countries that have aristocracies, where people who have lived there longer have more legal rights. In this country, we don't believe that. In this country, we believe all citizens and all property owners have the same legal rights.''

For East Haddam, the financial situation would not be so bad if it had other sources of cash. But as state and federal aid to municipalities has decreased, local reliance on property taxes has increased. Coincidentally, the East Haddam Board of Education is the town's biggest employer.

Couple that with an understaffed planning department: It's just Mr. Ventres and his secretary. Compare that to Glastonbury, a town Mr. Gibbons characterized as a model of planning and zoning. The town has a full-time director of community development, two secretaries, a town planner, a full-time environmental planner, a planning technician, three zoning enforcement officers and a full-time town engineer.

''And Glastonbury could use additional staff,'' Mr. Branse said. ''East Haddam, by comparison, is massively understaffed.''

What's the solution for towns? They certainly can't make the moratoriums permanent, just shut the door and keep everybody out. Communities aren't, after all, private clubs. One of the answers, town planners and consultants said, is cluster subdivisions, such as those housing developments built around golf courses that have been going up around the state. Such subdivisions allow houses on smaller lots and preserve open space, which in the end costs towns less in plowing, road maintenance and other services.

Some developers, such as Harry Day, who built the River Highlands, a golf course subdivision in Cromwell, called his project an ''open-space conservation development'' instead of cluster housing.

''I think we had a better response calling it that,'' Mr. Day said. ''If we hadn't gone with cluster housing, the golf course would have been standard housing, and we would have lost the open space.'' Of the development's 225 acres, 160 were reserved for open space. The development will have 202 houses. If a standard development had been built on the site, the open space could have been lost.

Towns also are aggressively competing for those desirable residents who will pay property taxes, but not drain town services: those 55 and older. Three such developments are in various stages of construction in Avon. They are high-end condominium complexes that range from 1,500 to 2,500 square feet.

A resident of a 2,500-square-foot condominium pays about $7,200 in taxes annually in Avon, but does not use the costly town services that a homeowner in a single-family house would use.

''Yes, that type of housing is more favorable than single-family homes,'' said Steven Kushner, Avon's town planner. ''With these projects, the roads are not public so we save money there, and we save on educational costs.''

Open-space funds, from which the towns may draw money to compete in the real-estate marketplace to save town land, also have become increasingly popular. East Haddam residents are expected to vote this week to determine if $5 million will be added to its open-space account. Glastonbury has already spent more than $10 million of its account on open space.

''One of the problems we identified was if there was a piece of property on the market that we were interested in and we approached the owner, we had to say 'Can you wait 10 months until the voters of the community approve the project?' '' said Ken Leslie, Glastonbury's economic development director. ''We realized if we were going to acquire meaningful pieces of open space, we needed to have the money readily available.''

Mr. Gibbons said towns must simply decide what they want and come up with a plan.

''The point is, don't draw the curtain on residential development, Mr. Gibbons said. ''The answer is to have a diversified community that has commercial, industrial and open space, which takes you into the realm of planning. Let's be on top of the game so we're not living in the post World-War II world, we're not a manufacturing state anymore. Let's see what we can do to attract professional offices, light industry and service. Let's zone land for that.''
