In a last-minute proposal to settle a dispute over spying on terror suspects, city officials said in federal court yesterday that the police would promise to adopt new guidelines to protect civil liberties if the court lifted a 20-year-old order that limits police surveillance and undercover operations.

But, in final arguments before Judge Charles S. Haight Jr. of United States District Court in Manhattan, civil liberties lawyers rejected the offer, calling it an empty gesture.

''What they say they will do is entitled to no consideration in this matter,'' Jethro M. Eisenstein, one of the lawyers, told the judge.

The arguments came on a motion by the city to do away with most of the provisions of a consent decree that ended a 1971 suit over harassment of political advocacy groups by the Police Department's ''red squad,'' as it was then known. The judge gave no timetable for his decision.

The city has asked to be relieved from the limits of the decree, known as the Handschu agreement. The police say it has made it impossible for them to follow terror leads, because it requires evidence of a crime to initiate spying.

The city's offer was made in an affidavit from David Cohen, a former C.I.A. official who is now the Police Department's deputy commissioner for intelligence. Judge Haight indicated interest in the promise, which Gail Donoghue, the city lawyer arguing the case, re-iterated in court.

''The promise was made in a sworn declaration, and I think the court should rely on it,'' Ms. Donoghue said.

As federal and local authorities around the country grapple with the issue of what liberties must be sacrificed to fight terror, the debate in the courtroom resonated with the emotions and uncertainties of the changed circumstance since the Sept. 11 attack. The lawyers and the judge searched for more than two hours for firm ground upon which to stake a new standard for police surveillance, but the two sides disagreed on the most basic issues.

For instance, both sides cited new F.B.I. surveillance guidelines as evidence for their arguments -- the civil liberties lawyers said the agency's post-Sept. 11 rules are equivalent to the Handschu agreement, while Ms. Donoghue argued that they granted much more leeway. The city's offer was based on those guidelines.

Mr. Eisenstein said the lawyers would consider the offer as part of a settlement, but only if it could be enforced by the court. The city's corporation counsel, Michael A. Cardozo, gave no indication the city was interested in such an agreement.

''We think it's clear the proposed modifications are appropriate,'' he said after the hearing.

Paul G. Chevigny, a law professor at New York University who argued against the city's motion yesterday, said, ''What is really the difference is the question of whether these guidelines should be enforced by a federal court or not.''

At yesterday's hearing, the courtroom was packed, mostly by people opposed to scuttling the Handschu guidelines. Joe Sucher, a filmmaker who was one of the original plaintiffs in the suit, said people had forgotten that the police had misused power in the 1960's and 1970's.

''I got pushed around a couple of times,'' said Mr. Sucher, who worked on a film called ''Red Squad'' in the late 1960's. ''A day after we filmed at their headquarters, two detectives showed up at the home of one of us because they had taken down the license number of the cars there.''

But city officials said the police should be trusted with enhanced surveillance powers.

''To challenge the good faith of the Police Department is not appropriate,'' Mr. Cardozo said.
