DR. HENRY E. JACOBS is a desperate man. He is desperate enough to make a house call to the State Capitol on March 26, dressed in his white lab coat, along with hundreds of his colleagues. He is asking for reforms that may reduce his soaring malpractice insurance rates.

The Connecticut State Medical Society is calling the event its ''White Coat Rally,'' the first of various moves that will put doctors in a place they have long struggled to avoid: the spotlight. But now the spotlight has begun to look like just the thing they need.

The event is not a walkout, not a strike, medical society spokesmen throughout the state say, carefully avoiding the terminology used in recent physician work stoppages in West Virginia, New Jersey and Quebec. Indeed, while the doctors gathering in Hartford that day won't be working, other doctors are expected to fill in for them.

The state medical society has held a Doctors' Day for years at the State Capitol, and doctors have trickled in to testify before the General Assembly's committees. The past several years have often seen them sitting before committees on insurance and real estate, public health, and the judiciary, asking for tort reform for medical malpractice. This year, they want more than a chat.

The Fairfield County Medical Association expects about 500 of its doctors to attend. Hartford and New Haven County were still waiting for attendance figures from their doctors. ''Your participation in this event is critical,'' says a message to members on the Web site of the Connecticut State Medical Society

The society said that malpractice insurance premiums have risen 30 percent for obstetricians over the last year, to $125,000 a year; 72 percent for neurologists, to $30,000; 30 percent for neurosurgeons, to $125,000, and 55 percent for family doctors and those in internal medicine, to $21,400.

The society is seeking legislation that caps pain and suffering awards in malpractice lawsuits. The issue has been misrepresented to the public, said Tim Norbeck, the executive director of the medical society. The group does not want limits on economic damages such as lost wages, medical expenses for the present and future, home health care and other costs. ''But the pain and suffering part, that has to be capped,'' Mr. Norbeck said. ''The cap will arrest the growth of premiums and stabilize the system. The floor and the ceiling have come together here and doctors are being crushed.''

Many hospitals, including Yale-New Haven, Bridgeport and Hartford, said that emergency rooms would be fully staffed on March 26 and that doctors were arranging for coverage in their offices for Doctor's Day.

''We neither condone nor condemn this action,'' said Lee Monroe, a spokeswoman at Hartford Hospital. ''We are sure patient care will not be disrupted, and the E.R. will be fully staffed.''

Bridgeport Hospital and Yale-New Haven were still trying to determine if Doctors' Day would prove a popular event for their doctors. ''We are adding extra emergency department staff to handle any possible increase in volume,'' said John Cappiello of Bridgeport Hospital. ''It could be a huge problem, or it might not be a problem at all.''

''We don't expect any impacts on patient care here,'' said Mark D'Antonio of Yale-New Haven. ''But it's a month away.''

Physicians such as Dr. Jacobs will look to colleagues to fill their shoes for the day. Dr. Jacobs is what is termed a ''solo practitioner'' in Hartford, and he is angry over the malpractice insurance issue. He is getting by this year, he said, and he may get by the next, but after that, he isn't so sure. He said many doctors are just quitting.

''These are desperate times and the public is underestimating it,'' he said. ''This will be a major access issue for them. You think middle-class women are going to want to line up at the clinic and take a number and wait all day long? That's not the way our society works.

''I simply cannot afford to stay in practice and not make a living,'' he said. ''Unlike municipal work, there's no pension plan waiting for me at the end of the road. The stock market decimated what savings I had, and nobody's been able to save anything for the past several years because of the economics of medicine.''

The average obstetrician earns about $150,000 in Hartford County and works about 80 to 90 hours a week, said Dr. Jacobs, who is president of the Hartford County Medical Association; primary-care physicians earn under $100,000 per year.

''They're working their butts off,'' he said, ''and to me, and I'm not speaking for the medical association here, I think it's pathetic that we passively accept that Michael Jordan makes $60,000 a minute bouncing a ball, and we tell a doctor who's making $100,000 he's a fat cat and he should be hammered down. Michael Jordan will never hold your life in the palm of his hand.''

The public doesn't understand the magnitude of the problem, doctors said. But they may soon enough, because the medical society's next move is to broadcast its case on billboards -- an unusual move for publicity-shy doctors and evidence of the level of their alarm. ''As doctors, we have always been victims of our own dignity,'' said Dr. Ed Volpintesta, who has run his family practice for 27 years from the same office at 165 Greenwood Avenue in Bethel. He switched his insurance company this year after his malpractice premiums almost doubled to $14,000.

''We were never trained to be politicians,'' he said. ''But this has been smoldering for a long time, and doctors are desperate. We don't seem to be getting anywhere and our dilemma is, how do we balance that individual patient who obviously deserves compensation with the greater needs of the health-care system?''
