Twenty-one small, white wooden crosses lay in the cold alley next to the Epitome restaurant today. Each bore the name and the young age of a victim, etched in black: 27, 31, 23, 19 . . .

Nicole Patterson, 22, was one of them. A mother of a 3-year-old, she was among those mourned as the city sought answers for the incident early Monday in which 21 people were trampled to death at the restaurant's second-floor nightclub, E2.

Today, there seemed neither solace nor balm for the victims' families, who found the details of death -- bodies bruised and crushed, and hearts too taxed to pump any longer -- too awful to fully comprehend.

''I'm at a loss for words,'' said Michael Pennington, Ms. Patterson's stepfather, sitting inside the family's West Side apartment, where relatives consoled one another this afternoon. It was a scene repeated in homes across the city as families made funeral arrangements, and clutched pictures taken with friends and family.

''She's crying all night,'' Mr. Pennington added, speaking of his wife, Sheretta Patterson. ''We're sitting in the dark. She's sitting there literally pulling her hair out of her head. And she can't stop crying because there are so many things that she wants to say to her daughter that she cannot say to her daughter now because she's not here.''

''We shouldn't be burying a 22-year-old because she went out to a club,'' he said.

Even word that the city planned to bring criminal contempt charges against the owners of the nightclub for violating a court order to close last year seemed to offer little comfort.

Outside the club, a shrine of flowers and teddy bears grew a few feet from the door that had been clogged by bodies trying to escape.

Morning traffic crawled down Michigan Avenue as motorists paused to look at the site. Throughout the day, family members, some carrying flowers, came by to pay their respects. And Mayor Richard M. Daley asked that churches toll their bells on Sunday 21 times.

But nothing seemed to resonate more than the sobs of two little boys who understood that Mama was never coming back home. Inside the West Side apartment of relatives, Debra Gill's boys, Edward, 11, and Marvin, 8, wept as her cousin spoke about their mother's death.

The cousin, Tammy Claiborne, last saw Ms. Gill on Sunday. Ms. Claiborne said that Ms. Gill had gone furniture shopping with her. They joked and laughed, and Ms. Gill talked about going out dancing to the E2 to celebrate her boyfriend's birthday. The next day, Ms. Claiborne was awakened to a knock on her door and the news that her cousin had died.

A homemaker, Ms. Gill, 29, was the mother of three other children -- ages 10, 5 and 3 -- besides Edward and Marvin.

Ms. Gill's relatives worry about her five children, and wonder if a court might place them in foster care.

''She was a good mama,'' said Ms. Gill's son, Edward.

''She used to make us laugh,'' Marvin said, his eyes teary.

Danielle Greene, 23, loved taking her siblings and young nieces and nephews to the movies. She was looking forward to a career as a probation officer and was studying criminal justice. She had recently gotten a job processing medical records.

''She was very family oriented,'' her aunt, Pamela Greene, said, holding her niece's prom picture at the family's home. ''She was there for me and everyone else in the family.''

Pamela Greene recalled how her niece had especially been there in 1994, when Pamela's daughter was gunned down at age 22 and lingered in intensive care for 11 days before dying. Six years later, the family said, another cousin of Danielle -- a 20-year-old woman -- was murdered. Then came the news on Monday morning.

''It's something that we can't cope with right now,'' Ms. Greene said. ''There's nothing we can do but just pray and ask God to give us the strength.''

A friend, Dionne Fleming, saw Danielle at the nightclub on Sunday night, and it all still seemed surreal.

Ms. Fleming, 25, remembered that a fight broke out, that someone sprayed Mace, and that the D.J., apparently unaware of how serious the situation was, said, ''Well, next week, y'all all bring your gas masks.''

''They were still playing the music, still serving drinks,'' Ms. Fleming said. ''The people that work there were serving liquor and covering their faces because you couldn't breathe in there.

''Everybody started gagging and coughing, and everybody started running toward the front. People were just falling out.''

On the white mantel of Linda Hooker's home, just blocks away, is a portrait of her son, Damien Riley, 24, her only child. He loved basketball and worked for his grandmother's janitorial service.

''I was at the hospital when they brought my baby in,'' Ms. Hooker, 46, said. The paramedics were trying to get his heart started. ''He never did regain consciousness.''

''I'm thinking, 'Did my baby call for me that night?' ''

Today it was hard for Ms. Hooker to shake the image of the bruises on Damien's arms, the way his jaw seemed dislocated. Her consolation is that she believes ''God took'' him and that as his body was being battered, his soul was no longer there.

Outside Nicole Patterson's home, her family has erected a shrine. Above her picture are the words, ''Heaven needs smiles too.''

In time, Mr. Pennington said they will find a way to explain to Ms. Patterson's son that she won't be coming home. And in time, perhaps they will find healing.

Right now, though, Mr. Pennington said, ''We're struggling trying to keep our sanity.''
