ON a recent weekday morning, 14 people sat around a horseshoe-shaped table at the Old Saybrook Fire House focusing on a diagram of the local high school. Brian Wysocki, an emergency management coordinator for the town and a 1986 graduate of the school, moved his finger across the floor plan of the boxy brick building just down the road.

''This,'' he said, pointing at the paper, ''will be the triage area.''

''The vaccinators,'' he continued, ''will be in the gym.''

The people at the table -- among them a police officer, a Web designer and an elderly doctor, who, by many accounts delivered most of the people in town above the age of 40 -- sat dressed in their woolly sweaters and corduroy, looking like they had gathered for a walk in the wintry New England woods. But actually they had come together, as they have every two or three weeks since early December, to discuss something as seemingly remote as summertime: the town's response to a possible smallpox outbreak.

''We have done a lot of planning, we're heads and tails above anyone I've talked to,'' said Mr. Wysocki, who is in charge of coordinating the post-outbreak vaccination clinic in the town. But, he conceded: ''There are more questions than answers. That truly is the case. There are so many variables, so what we're planning for is a worst-case scenario.''

If there is a smallpox outbreak, the federal government says it will be prepared to ship out enough vaccine for every American to be inoculated in emergency clinics across the country. And while the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention are providing guidelines to the states and the state health department is giving guidance, the onus of planning these clinics falls largely on teams of community-based volunteers, who will be, for the most part, local health and public safety officials.

So in Connecticut, as in all states, these volunteers are gathering in firehouses, town halls and churches, where they are working out the details while grappling with the surreal notion that their familiar hometowns could play a supporting role in the country's defense against a bio-terrorism attack.

''The thought of having to do a vaccination clinic is scary, in and of itself,'' Mr. Wysocki said. ''But the high school itself is so comforting. I know it so well.''

This, Mr. Wysocki said, gives him an advantage.

Still, the task ahead is monumentally difficult.

''Everything is like a jigsaw puzzle,'' said the state's health commissioner, Dr. Joxel Garcia, who said plans for Connecticut's mass vaccination clinics were submitted to the Centers for Disease Control in December. ''It's all interdependent.''

Late last year the Bush administration, fearing a terrorist attack with smallpox, launched a three-phase national program that will eventually provide a vaccination to every American who wants one. In late January four Connecticut health workers became the first civilians in the country to get the vaccine in the program's first phase. Some 4,213 health workers in 27 states have been vaccinated as of last Wednesday, including 88 in Connecticut.

The program has met its share of stumbling blocks. Nationwide, as many as 350 hospitals and a number of health care unions have recommended against getting the smallpox vaccine because of questions about compensation, liability and safety. In Connecticut, while all 32 acute-care hospitals have said they will participate in the program, so far only about 1,000 hospital workers have volunteered to get the vaccination, according to one of the program's main coordinators.

''We were hoping to have each hospital have their own core team to respond to a case of smallpox,'' said Christopher Cannon, director of the Yale New Haven Health System's Office of Emergency Preparedness. ''But the fact is we've gotten 25 percent of what we've hoped for.''

''The coordination and complexities of putting the hospital piece together is mind boggling,'' Mr. Cannon added. ''But then when you talk about these mass vaccination clinics, it's hard to think about.''

Based on guidelines from the Centers for Disease Control, the first phase of vaccinations will be given to the core hospital response teams, made up of critical hospital workers, from housekeepers to I.C.U. nurses, as well as to these small volunteer-based teams in towns and cities. Connecticut health officials now estimate that 5,800 people will be vaccinated in this phase, which should be completed by the end of April. Once finished, the plan will move into a second phase, which will offer the vaccine to 10 million first responders -- police, fire and emergency medical technicians -- around the country, and about 125,000 in Connecticut. Finally, some time as early as mid-summer, officials said the vaccine will be offered to every citizen in a third phase.

Connecticut health officials have divided the state into 41 vaccination regions, each with a director. Some of these regions will have more than one vaccination site, and for each site there will be a team of between 12 and 14 people, half of whom will be designated vaccinators and half of whom will perform other key roles. Additionally, federal guidelines say that for every 50,000 people in a region, there should be 240 volunteers to do everything from directing people into the clinic site to handing out eligibility forms.

Connecticut vaccinated four members of the state's Genesis Team on Jan. 24, which in turn has vaccinated more key health care workers at the Yale-New Haven Hospital and the Hartford Hospital. The community-based response teams and more members of the hospital-based teams will follow. Old Saybrook belongs to Region 35, which encompasses 12 towns and has two vaccination sites -- the Old Saybrook High School and the East Hampton High School -- and it appears to be ahead of the game. Their response team is already fully assembled and has done walk-throughs of the high school.

''There are some regions proactively involved and definitely ahead of the time frame,'' said Dr. Garcia. ''But in general every one is working very well.''

But the regional response teams said they still need a range of details from the state. When will the vaccinations be delivered to the clinics, and with what accompanying supplies? Do the towns need to pay for bandages? When will the volunteer vaccinators be trained to administer the vaccine? What if people are illiterate and can't read or sign the consent form? What about people who can't leave their homes or are in nursing homes? Do the people come to the clinic in alphabetical order by last name?

Most importantly, when do they come?

Dr. Garcia said that even a single case of smallpox should merit a mass vaccination.

''We'll follow federal guidelines, but for me as commissioner of health, it would not make any difference if it was California, Wyoming, Nebraska or New Jersey,'' he said. ''It would be an attack on our nation.

''Remember, the premise of all this is there's no basis to believe any case of smallpox would be naturally occurring. It would be considered a bio-terrorist act.''

Smallpox was eradicated globally in 1977 and has been kept only in stockpiles since then. The last case in the United States was in 1949. Dr. Garcia noted that the health department has sent out series of advisories and has been keeping in close contact with the regions. ''We need to accomplish, first, the core teams. Then we have to think of the real-life scenarios,'' he said.

For people operating at the local level, that's a frustrating message.

''We have many unanswered questions at our planning meetings that just can't be answered locally, so we wait for state or federal response'' said Thad King, the Region 35 director. ''The federal terrorism planning initiative is really several initiatives, of which bio-terrorism is a part. We need that global plan explained to us, to see how the parts fit, so that police, fire, E.M.S. and medical all understand their position and role.''

A major concern lingers over the lack of community volunteers to staff the clinics should the day come.

''I think if the medical community is reluctant to volunteer, it's understandable why other are as well,'' Mr. King continued. ''We cannot plan an effective response and be prepared after the fact.''

Some also wonder if the lack of volunteers could be a form of collective denial, or optimism.

''I don't know that people have been able to connect personally with the threat, and therefore decide whether they want to get involved,'' said Bob Baumer, a Web designer from Old Saybrook, and a volunteer who designed a Web site for Region 35 (www.smallpoxplan.info), which has an online volunteer sign-up sheet and reams of information about smallpox.
