After a fervent speech on character in which he challenged Air Force Academy cadets to weed out those who would sexually prey upon women in their ranks, Air Force Secretary James G. Roche said tonight that the protocols put in place a decade ago to prevent such attacks had failed and needed to be replaced.

''We have to stop what we're doing and take a look at it,'' he said in response to a cadet's question after a 35-minute speech that sounded in part like a tongue-lashing about the predatory behavior that has led to questions over character development at the academy and a Pentagon investigation into charges by nearly two dozen women that they had been raped or sexually assaulted as cadets.

''You guys have to clean this up,'' Mr. Roche implored. The problem, he said, is caused by ''a fringe element'' of the 4,000-cadet student population. ''But the fringe element tarnishes each and every one of you, John Jumper and me,'' he said. Gen. John P. Jumper is the Air Force chief of staff.

''We have been inundated by e-mails and calls,'' Mr. Roche said, ''and the only way to fix it is to fix it. The academy is not out of control, but there is a fringe that is.''

His remarks came at a long-scheduled appearance that was part of the academy's annual weeklong symposium on character and leadership. The recent accusations of rape and sexual assault from current and former cadets prompted him to tailor his speech.

The assaults, Mr. Roche said, constitute criminal behavior.

''Weakness of character absolutely will not be tolerated, because the consequences can be catastrophic,'' he said sharply, as cadets sat in rapt attention. ''The death of soldiers, sailors, airmen and marines due to the failures of character among leaders is criminal. Nothing angers me more than bad officership. Nothing.''

He said that because he would not ''tolerate the loss of any one of these brave men or women due to the failure of an officer's character, I will not tolerate a single unreported criminal act on the part of our cadets.''

He said it was ''reprehensible for a rapist or someone who would sexually assault a woman, or protects these bums who do, to become a leader of airmen.''

Accusations that women have been raped and that protocols have failed to protect them have roiled the academy to such a degree that several federal lawmakers have called for Congressional hearings and an independent investigation beyond the one the Air Force initiated in January. General Jumper said this week that he welcomed outside scrutiny.

For more than a week, a team of Air Force investigators from the Pentagon has been at the academy, collecting information and interviewing cadets and former cadets. Their work is part of an effort that officials say will lead to a report to General Jumper and Mr. Roche.

Tonight Mr. Roche promised that new procedures would be developed to encourage women to come forward, to eradicate a culture that works to protect assailants, and to ensure a thorough investigation of every criminal complaint.

''When I receive the team's report,'' Mr. Roche said, ''we'll have a determination on what further steps are necessary to ensure justice is done and to ensure that our values and standards are being met.''

He urged cadets to seek out the investigators from the Pentagon and offer ideas of how the system might be improved.

''General Jumper and I will then review our collective ideas with fellow officers and direct immediate implementation,'' he said. ''Expect major changes. Expect them across the board.''

Mr. Roche took questions from the cadets after his remarks and among more than a dozen posed all but one concerned issues of sexual assault. About half came from women.

Only one generated applause from the audience of mostly men. A woman asked Mr. Roche how disturbed he was that the recent accusations and publicity might be creating ''a schism'' between men and women at the academy, leading to a perception that the men were all ''rapists and misogynists.''

After sustained clapping died down, Mr. Roche said, ''Yes, I'm concerned about that.''
