The signs are conspicuous: blood-red paint on square slices of worn plywood, nailed high on leafless trees.

They bear a message for all in Englewood, one of the most homicide-plagued neighborhoods in Chicago.

A mostly black, working-class neighborhood of two-story houses and modest apartment buildings on the South Side, Englewood is dotted with vacant lots, churches and liquor stores. It is a neighborhood where drug dealers congregate no matter the season, and where guns keep blazing and bodies keep dropping.

One of the handmade signs hangs on a barren tree at the corner outside Mack Haymon's house. Mr. Haymon, a graying 69-year-old who has lived in Englewood for 33 years, does not know how it got there. He recalls how he came home from work one day a year or so ago to find the sign in the tree, about 10 feet above the spot where he always parks his car, yards from his front door, where a mugger once put a cocked gun to his head, and where his 28-year-old son was gunned down on a summer night in 1990. The sign reads, ''Stop the Violence.''

Now it seems that almost everyone around here has seen the signs with their jarring decrees: ''Thou shalt not kill.''  ''Who's son is next?''  ''God love us.''  ''Black on black love.''

No one seems to know who put up the signs, but there is no mystery about why they are here. In the last decade, nearly 700 people have been killed in this four-square-mile neighborhood. In 2002, there were 61 homicides, 17 more than the year before.

While homicide rates in many big cities have declined to levels not seen since the 1960's, Chicago's have been stubbornly persistent. In 2001, Chicago led the nation in homicides with 665. Last year, police records show that Los Angeles outpaced Chicago's 647 homicides with 658. But Chicago's rate in 2002 -- 22.3 killings per 100,000 -- is highest among the nation's nine largest cities with populations over one million, and was four times the national homicide rate of 5.6 in 2001. The rate in 2002 was 17.8 in Los Angeles and 7.2 in New York, which has nearly three times the population of Chicago but recorded fewer than 600 homicides.

Behind the statistics are people like Mr. Haymon, who have to live with the effects of the killings long after the latest homicide has disappeared from headlines and the remnants have been washed from the public way. ''When that child got killed,'' Mr. Haymon said of his son Dwayne, ''I was ready to pull out of here. People just said they would stick with us, pray with us. It's been kind of tough.''

Standing on the porch of the house he has fortified with block glass over the basement windows, Mr. Haymon said that soon he would tear down the mysterious sign nearby.

''I want to take that old ugly sign down,'' he said bitterly, looking up at it. ''I really want it down.''

Outside the tiny storefront on Ashland Avenue, another sign reads, ''Englewood Cares.''

Inside, where gospel music flowed on a recent afternoon, and where the doors are typically kept locked, the Rev. Phillita Carney and several elderly women had just finished passing out food to the needy. The small Christian outreach, founded by Ms. Carney, offers the essentials: food, love, the Gospel, counseling for homicide survivors. But the gray-haired church mothers have witnessed enough violence for a lifetime, and trade their own war stories.

''I was watching a young man get beat up one night and he was just begging for mercy. 'Please y'all let me go,' '' recalled Rosie Lee Melton, 77. ''But the boy didn't stop beating him. So I looked up toward heaven and I said, 'Lord have mercy on that young man.' I said, 'Come and see about him.' And when I said that, the police came and rescued him.''

''It just does something to me,'' said Mrs. Melton, 77, whose picket fence has been pockmarked with gunfire. Over the years, some of the bullets have penetrated her basement, and the blood from killings has stained the street outside her door.

Ms. Carney said, ''When I witnessed my first homicide, outside my door, and I saw how half the side of the face of a young man was just blown off, my stomach just curled up.'' Then a crowd gathered. The youngsters played the radio and ate popcorn and candy in the street while the boy's body lay there.

''It was like, nothing -- expendable,'' Ms. Carney recalled. ''That's the part that hurts. That's not normal at all.''

Absent normalcy, residents like Mrs. Melton have added security gates and bars on windows and doors, deadbolt locks. They keep their grandchildren and great-grandchildren within arm's reach, too afraid sometimes to let them ride their bikes outdoors.

''I feel like a prisoner,'' Mrs. Melton said. ''The only thing I can do is to pray.''

Why not move away?

''Where are am I going?'' asked Charlotte Stovall, 75. ''You can't sell your property. You're not going to get what it's worth.'' Besides, how could she escape the violence? ''It's everywhere.''

Later that afternoon, in a neighborhood south of Englewood, detectives and reporters lingered at the scene of a quadruple homicide, the youngest victim a 2-year-old boy who the authorities said was shot in the face.

On a recent snowy night, Sgt. Ronald Behling's patrol car rolled up Racine Avenue in the Seventh District, which encompasses Englewood. Bad weather typically means a quiet night for police, he said.

Sergeant Behling, 47, is assigned to the third watch, the shift from 3:30 p.m. to 2 a.m., when police say the bulk of crime occurs. A 17-year veteran of the force, he says he has answered about three dozen homicide calls over the years, and the shock has long worn off.

''You're supposed to be professional when we arrive at a scene,'' he said. ''You do your job.''

At the Seventh District station, inside the commander's office, a map of the district is dotted with red pins marking the places the bodies fell last year. Sitting behind his desk, Englewood District Police Commander Frank Trigg echoed the department's belief that curbing violent crime is a joint task for police and the community. He pointed to the department's community policing program, which involves monthly meetings between police and residents, and to several law enforcement strategies aimed at combating street gangs and drugs. While such measures were in place last year, and homicide and violent crime fell slightly across the city, Englewood's homicides rose sharply.

Dr. Gary Slutkin, who in 1995 founded the Chicago Project for Violence Prevention, said entrenched street gangs and their gun battles for control of the drug trade accounted for the many killings here -- a trend that defies the falling crime rates in many other major cities.

About four years ago, CeaseFire, a component of Dr. Slutkin's project, based at the University of Illinois at Chicago's School of Public Health, began blanketing high-crime neighborhoods with glossy signs, bearing slogans like ''Don't Shoot, I Want to Grow Up.'' There are now hundreds of thousands, though the project is not responsible for the handmade signs in Englewood. Dr. Slutkin, a physician and epidemiologist, said he believed this ''public education messaging'' would help do for gun violence what public education campaigns have done for AIDS and cigarette smoking. But he and others say there are no easy solutions.

For every person who is killed, ''there are about six or eight people who are shot who don't die,'' Dr. Slutkin said. ''The ripple effect of this is enormous because there are all these witnesses for each shooting.'' In some Chicago neighborhoods, as many as 80 percent of the children have witnessed serious violence, he said.

In Mr. Haymon's estimation, the handmade signs around Englewood have done little good. He sounds wearied by a lifetime in Englewood, by years of hearing gunfire and by the violence that has touched his family.

He and his wife, Eloise, bought their home, a three-bedroom bungalow, in December 1956, shortly after they were married. It was the place where the Haymons, who were both postal workers and are now retired, would raise their five children. But almost overnight, the whites disappeared, and over time came the decay and decline, the cycle of drugs, gangs and violence.

Three years before his son Dwayne was shot to death outside the family's house, Mr. Haymon discovered the lifeless body of his son, Steven, in the basement of their home. The cause of his death, according to the medical examiner's office, was alcohol intoxication. He was 28, the same age Dwayne would be when he died.

Last year, one of Mr. Haymon's grandsons turned 28. And last September Mr. Haymon was lying in bed when someone came screaming, banging on the door.

''They said, 'Your grandson's laying down there in the street,' '' he recalled. ''They didn't tell me whether he was dead or alive.''

By the time he got to the corner about two blocks away, there was a pool of blood but no body. Though Mr. Haymon's grandson had been pumped full of bullets -- 13 in all, Mr. Haymon said -- he survived. ''He still hasn't recovered from that yet,'' Mr. Haymon said.

Neither has Mr. Haymon.

On a recent afternoon, he stared at the mysterious sign outside his home and huffed at the idea that it and the others have done any good. Even so, he said, ''It's quiet right now.''

Gunfire has not been as frequent recently, he said, and he has seen more police officers patrolling the streets. Even Frank Trigg, the district police commander, is cautiously relishing a bit of good news. In January last year, there were eight homicides in his district. This January, there was just one. So far this year, the Englewood district has recorded 4 homicides, compared with 12 for the same period last year. Citywide there have been 64 homicides as of Feb. 27, compared with 76.

Both men figure it is a good sign, a sign that things may be changing, and perhaps a sign of hope.
