They came by the hundreds in this small town to a Methodist church, where an organ played somberly and softly, to pray for the safe return of one of their own.

The community prayer service held here tonight was in honor of Pfc. Patrick Miller, a hometown boy who played football and wrestled for Valley Center High School, and who is now among the Americans being held as a prisoner of war by the Iraqis. Men, women and children sat in wooden pews, offering prayers, wiping away tears, searching for solace and yet remaining hopeful for a young man's safe return.

As yellow ribbons appeared on trees and around telephone poles here in this town just north of Wichita, it was clear today that the war being fought by troops thousands of miles away had hit home. Private Miller, 23, was one of five American soldiers shown on Iraqi television on Sunday after being captured. The clips also showed several dead American soldiers.

''It's almost a shock that this could happen to our small town,'' said Bob Massey, senior pastor of Valley Center Assembly of God Church, who helped organize the prayer vigil held at the Valley Center First United Methodist Church and attended by about 350.

''It's difficult because of the fact that we're close-knit,'' Mr. Massey said as people filed into church for the service. ''He's one of our own.''

Like some others here, Mr. Massey said he became aware of Mr. Miller's capture while watching the news late Sunday night. He was stunned when he saw the young man, whom he recognized immediately.

''My first reaction,'' he said, ''was to pray and to say: That's Patrick, and I know him well. He's a good soldier. He'll do fine.''

Thomas Hershberger, Private Miller's half-brother, told The Associated Press that he wanted the United States to finish the war ''as fast as possible'' so that his brother could come home.

''She is not doing the best right now,'' Mr. Hershberger said of his mother, who lives in New Mexico. ''I haven't had a conversation with her without her crying.''

A NATION AT WAR: WAITING
