Until recently, along Interstate 294, a glowing billboard was etched with a chalk outline of a body and the message ''There are some messes no one should have to clean.''

The advertisement belonged to Aftermath Inc., a suburban Chicago company that specializes in sanitizing the scenes of homicides, suicides and unattended deaths. Chris Wilson said he and his partner, Tim Reifsteck, founded Aftermath eight years ago to fill a void, taking on a job that few would want.

Mr. Wilson said that a neighbor had committed suicide, and the two men volunteered to clean up after learning that the police and paramedics did not handle such tasks and that there was no one else to do it.

''While we were doing it, we were like, 'Gosh, we thought the police did this or the fire department or the funeral home or the coroner's office,' but none of them do perform this service,'' said Mr. Wilson, 30. ''So we were like, 'This may be a niche.' ''

In taking on the often grisly jobs, Aftermath became one of a growing number of companies specializing in such work, according to the American Bio-Recovery Association, a Washington lobbying group. Kent Berg, who founded the association in 1996, said it had nearly 50 member companies nationwide, with total sales of $20 million to $25 million.

Other businesses also turn a profit from postmortem services, including funeral homes, florists and T-shirt shops that make memorial shirts for homicide victims.

Ruben Aguayo, 35, who runs an air-brush shop at a mall in suburban North Riverside, said he was not taking advantage of anyone's misfortune, only meeting a need.

''I'm here, I can do the work, I'm here for them,'' Mr. Aguayo said, standing by a kiosk decorated with portraits of Tupac Shakur and Aaliyah. He makes T-shirts, for $20 to $25 each, emblazoned with the photograph of the victim and expressions like ''we miss you'' and ''save a place for me in thug heaven.''

In 2002, Chicago had the highest homicide rate -- 22.3 killings per 100,000 people -- of the nation's nine largest cities.

Cleanup of a typical homicide scene costs about $3,000. But more grisly scenes or multiple homicides can cost up to $7,000. Mr. Wilson said his business takes in about $2 million in 12 states.

It is a tough job, one that can take its toll on workers, who typically undergo counseling.

After a homicide in Chicago, an Aftermath crew arrives at the scene, each member wearing a white plastic protective suit, breathing apparatus, gloves and a protective face shield. The company has 16 technicians, who work in teams of two or more. Typically, they strip down a homicide scene once the police are done, tearing out blood-soaked walls, floors and carpeting and leaving everything cleaned and repaired within 24 hours.

Mr. Wilson said that Aftermath cleaned up after most of the indoor homicides in Chicago but that there was a reason they did not handle more. ''A lot of them happen on the streets,'' he explained. ''The fire department comes out there and hoses it off in the sewage runoff.''
