It was not so many years ago that Fife Symington considered his proudest achievement the fiscal well-being of Arizona. As governor through much of the 1990's, he presided over tax reductions, income growth and surging capital investments, a stewardship that made him a rising star in the Republican Party.

These days, Mr. Symington's main sources of professional pride include a tangy cheesecake laced with mascarpone, a Florentine frozen meringue filled with amaretto cream and a coffee-flavored chocolate cake known as the Governor, his signature dessert, which promises ''low tax, high taste.''

While some former politicians slide easily into lives as lawyers, lobbyists and corporate executives, Mr. Symington is that rare public servant who has become a pastry chef. On most mornings, he toils away at Franco's Italian Caffé, a new restaurant here, creating desserts that the owner-manager, Franco Fazzuoli, insists are every bit as popular as the appetizers, entrees and brick-oven pizzas that Mr. Fazzuoli favored as a restaurateur in lower Manhattan -- he owned Ponte Vecchio, Cent'Anni and Zinno -- before moving west.

Mr. Symington, 57, who resigned from office in 1997 after his conviction on fraud charges -- he was later exonerated -- says he has never been happier.

''You have to keep track of a lot of things,'' he said the other day. ''There is always a critical path to getting a menu or a meal together, and there's a lot of pressure. But there's also something about working with a wonderful group of people in the kitchen. Some would hate it. I think it's magic.''

Mr. Symington's path from falling political star to rising star as a pastry chef and part owner of the restaurant is not as unlikely as it sounds, given the swirl of events that drove him to the kitchen.

After six years in office, Mr. Symington was convicted in September 1997 of criminal charges that he defrauded lenders as a real estate developer in the 1980's. He promptly resigned and was sentenced to 30 months in federal prison. But free pending his appeal, he set out to reinvent himself.

''Mildly interested'' in cooking all his life, Mr. Symington said, ''I kept coming back to culinary school.''

He enrolled in one in Scottsdale, a Phoenix suburb, enduring a six-week ''boot camp,'' as he called it, learning the proper way to clean pots, scrub floors and use knives before moving on to the finer points of cooking, specializing in baking. ''It was very educational and very humbling,'' he said, adding that all the while, ''I had my bags packed, just in case.''

After 15 months, he earned a degree in culinary arts and restaurant management and found an internship with an old friend, Mr. Fazzuoli, who then owned an Italian restaurant in Scottsdale. It was not long after, in 1999, that the United States Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit overturned Mr. Symington's conviction. Two years later, he won a pardon from President Bill Clinton.

The pardon was something of a surprise to many in Arizona, though not to Mr. Symington, who has known Mr. Clinton for years. They met, he said, one summer more than 30 years ago in Hyannis, Mass. One day, Mr. Symington said, Mr. Clinton swam too far out and was caught in a riptide. Mr. Symington said he swam out to pull Mr. Clinton to shore, an act that prompted much needling from Republicans decades later. ''The joke around here was always, 'You saved Bill Clinton's life?' '' Mr. Symington said. ''I always told them, 'It was the Christian thing to do.' ''

Once freed of his legal entanglements, Mr. Symington founded his own culinary school with one set of partners, joined another group in a military contracting company and with yet another, including his wife, Ann, and Mr. Fazzuoli, in opening Franco's.

Cooking, he said, now occupies about half his working time. He reports for work early in the day three to four times a week, surveys needs and sets out to make the four or five desserts that appear on the daily menu. ''He works eight, nine hours, depending on how busy we are,'' Mr. Fazzuoli said.

Even when he is in baking apron and chef's hat, Mr. Symington says, his mind is never far from politics. He applauds President Bush for the military action against Iraq. He says Arizona's new governor, Janet Napolitano, a Democrat, has done a good job so far.

''But let's see how she is in four years,'' he said. Was he hinting at a return to politics?

''Being governor is a great job,'' Mr. Symington said. ''It's always possible, I guess. To say the door is closed, no. There's a chance I could get back in it. But I am happy doing what I'm doing now. I'm not pining away for another job in politics. Still, you never know in life what's going to happen.''
