His hair is silvery now, his steps slower than in the early days at the Great Lakes Naval Station, where he played the saxophone as a young Navy bandsman. But the soul-stirring sound of jazz from Von Freeman's tenor sax is still as smooth as Scotch.

It was more than 60 years ago that Mr. Freeman, whose full name is Earl Lavon Freeman, joined the Navy. It was a time when black men were relegated to being mess men, cooks or stewards. But from 1942 to 1945, more than 5,000 black musicians -- among them Mr. Freeman -- trained at Great Lakes, north of Chicago near Waukegan, Ill. Eventually, they were sent out in 25-piece bands to play at naval bases across the country.

After World War II, some of these men became renowned jazz artists and arrangers. They included Mr. Freeman and Clark Terry, the jazz trumpeter who later performed with Duke Ellington and the ''Tonight'' show band. Mostly, they were ordinary black men who, wearing their Navy blues, became de facto ambassadors of desegregation -- forging the way for African-Americans with the disarming devices of jazz licks and wailing horns long before the height of the civil rights movement.

Today, amid a new war, there is for Mr. Freeman a bit of nostalgia in his Tuesday night gigs at the New Apartment Lounge on the city's South Side, where a blue-and-white marquee and the street outside bear his name. With the light of a television set that moments earlier carried news of the war extinguished, the music began.

''Go 'head Von!'' a man in the standing-room-only crowd of blacks and whites shouted as Mr. Freeman began the show one recent night amid the rattle of a snare drum, a soothing bass and moody piano.

''All right,'' crooned another patron. ''I like that, Von.''

Wearing his shades and a star-spangled cap, he played, the music soothing the worries of war and life, if only for a few hours, just like old times.

Mr. Freeman, now 80, and other black musicians, who have been credited by historians with helping to dissolve the walls of racial exclusion in the Navy, called the movement that originated at the Great Lakes base the Great Lakes Experience. In March, Mr. Terry and other former Navy bandsmen, all now in their 80's, gathered for a concert and reunion here to bring to light their contributions and to rekindle memories.

''It was a great experience and great to be a part of it,'' Mr. Freeman said of his days as a Navy bandsman.

''Our duties were, we raised the flag and at noon we played for the enlisted soldiers and at night we played for officers,'' Mr. Freeman said. ''It was great, not for the part that a lot of men lost their lives. But if you had to do something, it was a beautiful thing to have done.''

Others agree, but say that the Navy, like other places in the nation then, was resistant, if not hostile, to integration.

''There was a white Navy and a black Navy,'' said Mr. Terry, 82, who lives in Haworth, N.J. ''We were literally the forerunners to Rosa Parks long before she came along.''

Mr. Terry said the recent reunion and celebration, whose sponsors included the Center for Black Music Research at Columbia College in Chicago, was important because ''so much history of black people has been hidden from America.''

President Franklin D. Roosevelt helped nudge the Navy toward integration, suggesting that the Navy assemble black bands, and thereby elevating the status of black Navy men. In 1942, black musicians began arriving at Great Lakes. During that time, blacks and whites were assigned to separate camps.

Despite their increasing numbers, or perhaps because of it, blacks had to endure minstrel shows, teasing and racial epithets from their white comrades, Mr. Terry said.

''It was a tearful experience, but it was a cheerful experience,'' he said. ''We endured because we knew we were a part of the new movement. We felt like it was something that had to be done.''

Mr. Freeman, who grew up on the South Side here and still lives there, was drafted into the military during World War II. He had graduated from DuSable High School, where he played in the school band, and left for boot camp at the age of 18 with a letter of recommendation from his band instructor and eventually landed at Great Lakes. There, Seaman Freeman, as he was known, and other black musicians crossed paths. Besides Mr. Terry, there were Willie Smith, the alto sax player, and Major Holley, the bassist who died in 1990, among others.

In their spare time, the men often performed on the South Side -- where Sarah Vaughan, Billie Holiday, Cab Calloway and Lena Horne also appeared -- until the sun rose outside one smoke-filled joint after another.

''The people in Chicago supported us so much that they would take you home and feed you,'' Mr. Terry said. ''It was beautiful to come into Chicago.''

Their music, they say, is what helped them all to endure, to overcome, and eventually to help tear down the racial barriers. On July 26, 1948, President Harry S. Truman signed an executive order integrating the military.

While the former Navy bandsmen acknowledge that their contributions are not widely known, at Great Lakes their legacy has not been lost. On a recent day, the sounds of jazz filled the auditorium of the base as the current Navy band -- a crew of black and white faces -- rehearsed.

''Time changes everything, I believe,'' Mr. Freeman said.

And even with the war today, he said he believed that it, too, would pass with time and song.

Virgil Johnson, 73, watched his longtime friend Mr. Freeman warm up.

''It takes all the stress off you,'' Mr. Johnson said. ''You forget all about the war and everything. This is how you relax.''
