CHESTER, an old mill town on the Connecticut River, used to be called Dog Town, for the abundance of stray pets said to have roamed its streets. At one point it was also proudly called the Auger Bit Capital of the World, thanks to noisy factories in and around the town center. Now, the only dog you can count on seeing downtown is Stella, the bulldog at the local liquor store, and the town has shed its industrial past and polished its rural charms to become a relaxed getaway for artists and those who like to mingle with them.

''We'd never seen a town like this in our lives,'' said Mary Sue Rynecki, a Newsweek vice president who splits her time between Chester and the Upper East Side of Manhattan. ''There are historic homes, interesting people, cultural events and great restaurants, but it's unpretentious.''

Jim Travis, an advertising consultant who lives in a riverfront colonial-style home in Chester and an apartment in Manhattan, is pleased that the town ''hasn't gotten cutesy'' as weekenders have flooded in. ''It's kind of funky, and the people who care about this town make sure there aren't Tinker Toy shops out on Main Street,'' he said. ''It's all artists and hangouts and neat little places.''

By most accounts, Chester's transformation began about 25 years ago as artists, writers and musicians were drawn to its cheap real estate (prices have since gone up) and to the setting.

''The town's like a movie set,'' said Peter Walker, a lyricist, actor and native New Yorker who went there on weekends for years, visiting a friend, the playwright and actor Max Showalter, before buying his own Chester house in 1998 and moving in full time from Manhattan.

The downtown is compact, with old, eccentric clapboard buildings camped next to each other along Main Street or climbing up and down nearby hillside streets. The rural surroundings are crisscrossed with brooks, dotted with ponds and lakes, and partially covered in state forest. About 10 miles away, down the river, is Long Island Sound.

The Scene

''Someone said to me when we bought the house, 'Wow, you're joining the Chester mafia,' '' said Fritz Jellinghaus, who runs a Manhattan-based consulting firm that links artists with companies. The mafia, he discovered, is made up of ''writers, artists and journalists'' from Manhattan. The Chester house that he and his wife, Cynthia Glacken, a communications designer, bought last fall is a 10-room Cape Cod on an acre of land.

The people she meets in Chester ''like books, arts and ideas,'' Ms. Glacken said.

Mr. Walker, the lyricist, said he was attracted to Chester by the theater. In the town center are the Norma Terris Theater (an annex of the Goodspeed Opera House in nearby East Haddam), and the Chester Meeting House, where the Meeting House Players and other companies stage productions throughout the year. ''There's an artistic sensibility up here that goes beyond the norm,'' Mr. Walker said. ''There's a lot of major talent in the area, and we all connect.''

Several times a year, downtown gallery and shop owners keep their businesses open late for an evening of openings, and people walk through the town looking at art and drinking wine out of Dixie cups.

One of the journalists with a house in Chester is Morley Safer, the ''60 Minutes'' newsman. Other residents are Sol LeWitt, the American minimalist artist, and David Hays, the theatrical designer and founder of the National Theater of the Deaf, which moved from Chester to Hartford in 2000.

Pros

Chester is good for dining and drinking, with options from Provençal food at ''the Du,'' as some locals call the highly rated Restaurant du Village, to the Lunch Box, a basic breakfast spot that doubles as a travel agency. At the friendly Pattaconk 1850 Bar & Grille on Main Street, a favorite haunt, 126 ceramic beer mugs hang above the bar, each to be claimed by the regular customer who is its designated user.

This is good country for outdoor lovers. The Cockaponset State Forest occupies 40 percent of the town, keeping a good chunk of land as undevelopable open space while offering up miles of trails.

Boaters can dock in Chester and motor out to Long Island Sound. There are four marinas, three yacht clubs and a public boat launch on the river; boat owners can usually find a slip at the marinas, though the clubs are not easy to get into. Riverfront residents can build their own docks, but each must be approved by town zoning officials.

Cedar Lake, which covers 75 acres, is ringed by homes and has a state-run boat launch. The Y.M.C.A. runs a camp on the lake and the town recreation department sponsors swimming classes there for children. The town also runs soccer, softball and baseball programs open to anyone who owns property in town.

Up the road from Cedar Lake, within the Cockaponset forest, is the Pattaconk Reservoir, where the state operates another public boat launch, and people can swim and fish.

The town's planning and zoning department has worked hard to keep commercial development at bay.

Cons

For a good selection of basics like groceries and toiletries, residents have to drive out of town. Some people used to city amenities miss good bookstores, brunch spots, gyms and food delivery.

Chester has started to attract a stream of tourists, particularly in the summer months, creating a parking problem and adding to the dissatisfactions of old-timers who remember a quieter town and sometimes resent the affluent newcomers.

Social life tends to be split, with the New York crowd separate from the longtime locals. ''There's a contingent out there who want to get T-shirts made that say 'Endangered Species: Chester Native,' '' said Robert Miceli, the town historian. ''On the surface everything's fine, but a lot of the natives feel like they're looked down on.''

On the flip side, Nick Rynecki, who spent the last 13 years renovating an early 19th century house in town with his wife, said, ''We find the social life a little limited to the people who come up from the city; the locals don't want to mix with us.''

Real Estate Market

''We've had a terrific market,'' said Leslie Buckner Strauss, the owner of the Century 21 Heritage Company (860-526-1200) in downtown Chester. She estimates that sales have gone up 25 percent in the last two years.

Many property hunters look for a house within walking distance to the downtown, but those have become increasingly hard to come by. In January, a small Victorian home on School Lane, near Main Street, sold for $193,000 after being listed only days earlier at $199,000.

This week there were 20 active listings in Chester, and six of those properties were priced at more than $1 million. One, a newly constructed six-bedroom stone and shingled house overlooking the Connecticut River, with five and a half baths, was priced at $4.5 million. Just one house, a three-bedroom, one-bath farmhouse in need of work, was priced at less than $150,000.

Fourteen houses were under contract this week, at an average price of $322,250. The average price for the seven house sales completed so far this year was $217,500.

This week, Century 21 had for sale a 1,654-square-foot three-bedroom, two-bath ranch for $269,500 and a 2,700-square-foot three-bedroom, two-and-a-half-bath Colonial for $419,900.

Bonfanti Real Estate (860-526-4933), also located in Chester, had a 2,600-square-foot three-bedroom, two-bath colonial-style house for $360,000 and a 3,700-square-foot historic home built in 1742, with six bedrooms, three bathrooms, six working fireplaces and a butternut tree said to be the country's oldest and largest, for $650,000.

Billie Bonfanti, owner of Bonfanti Real Estate, said sales in the last few months had been relatively few because of the town's limited inventory. But he said he expected both sales and new construction to pick up over the next year.

LAY OF THE LAND  In Movie-Set Beauty, a 'Mafia' of Artists and Book Lovers

POPULATION: 3,743.

SIZE: 15.9 square miles.

NUMBER OF HOMES: 1,326.

MEDIAN HOUSE PRICE: $532,000.

RECENT SALES: In the last three months, seven homes in Chester have sold, including a three-bedroom ranch, built in 1965, two miles from the town center, for $183,000; a three-bedroom Victorian within walking distance of the center, on half an acre of land, for $359,000; and a two-bedroom stone cottage about a mile from the town center for $217,500.

DISTANCE FROM NEW YORK: 120 miles.

TRAVEL TIME: In light traffic, two and a half hours.

GETTING THERE: Take Interstate 95 northbound to Exit 69 in Old Saybrook and pick up Route 9 North. Leave Route 9 at Exit 6, and at the bottom of the ramp, make a right onto Route 148 and follow it for one mile into the center of town. Amtrak from Penn Station stops in Old Saybrook, about a two-hour trip, and Essex Taxi (860-767-7433) makes the connection to Chester, 10 miles away.

WHILE YOU'RE LOOKING: The 123 Main, a Victorian bed and breakfast (860-526-3456), has five rooms, three with private baths. Prices range from $95 to $145 a night. The Inn at Chester (318 West Main Street, 860-526-9541) is undergoing renovations but should be open later this month. Its 43 rooms range from $195 to $750, for a suite.

HAVENS
