Even as office vacancy rates for Boston are exceeding those of the early 1990's, development in some significant niche markets -- life science research, academia and hotels -- is flourishing.

In greater Boston, 23.3 percent of the offices are available for lease or sublease compared with 5.5 percent in 2000, according to Spaulding & Slye Colliers, a real estate services concern here. In 1991, the low point of the last severe economic downturn, that figure was 16.9 percent. The availability rate in Boston's prime financial district is now 18.9 percent, up from 16.7 percent at the end of 2002, 4.1 percent in 2000 and 16 percent in 1991.

But development in niche markets is going full tilt. In Boston and Cambridge, 8,689 hotel rooms have recently opened, are in construction or have been authorized by building permits. Colleges have about six million square feet of classrooms, dormitories and administrative offices in development and are planning millions more square feet.

Last month, Harvard University, the region's largest academic property owner, with 18 million square feet of space, agreed to purchase 91 acres of land adjacent to its business school in the Allston neighborhood of Boston. That purchase -- now being challenged by government agencies -- would bring to 341 acres the property it has gradually acquired in Boston, dwarfing its 216-acre campus in Cambridge, which has 12 million square feet of space.

Construction is under way in the two cities on about seven million square feet of life science laboratories, at a cost of $300 to $600 a square foot, with an additional four million square feet being planned in Boston alone.

Each of these niche markets is modest when compared with 56-million-square-foot office market in the city of Boston. But as a whole, they are a solid underpinning for the wobbly commercial property market and fortify the economic foundation for future growth.

Boston itself now has about 5 million square feet of labs and 25 million square feet of academic space. By 2007, when the current hotel projects are completed, Boston and Cambridge will have 22,700 rooms, a 50 percent increase, officials in both cities estimate.

Hotel development took off in 1997 when the city and state agreed to finance a new convention center if at least 4,800 new hotel rooms were built to accommodate conventioneers and generate tax revenues to help pay for the center. Of the 8,680 new rooms, 4,191 have opened, in 22 new hotels and 4 expansions. Seven hotels are under construction, with 914 rooms. Permits have been issued for construction of another 3,584 rooms, said Matthew Arrants, director of the Pinnacle Advisory Group, a hotel consulting company, who added that declines in occupancy rates and average room prices might delay some projects.

For the life science labs, the city's teaching hospitals and schools have been growth catalysts. Many hospitals are linked to universities that have huge endowments to use as collateral for loans or to finance construction. Boston and Cambridge researchers have also benefited from federal grants, including $1.6 billion last year from the National Institutes of Health.

Potential tenants for the lab space, in addition to the hospitals and researchers, are businesses that rely on them, like pharmaceutical, biomedical or biotechnology companies. As its entry to Boston, Merck is building a 300,000-square-foot lab in the Longwood Medical Area.

The Longwood Medical Area itself is mushrooming, with two million square feet of labs in eight buildings -- including 1.1 million square feet of speculative space -- under development, said Owen Donnelly, a consultant for the Boston Redevelopment Authority, the city planning agency. In addition, the various Longwood Medical Area entities are planning at least another four million square feet of new labs, said Eric Buerhrens, the Harvard Medical School executive dean for administration and finance.

By fall, when Harvard Medical School completes a $260 million, 530,000-square-foot lab, it will occupy 2.25 million square feet in 16 buildings, almost three times its space in 1996, Mr. Buerhrens said.

For strongly endowed institutions, a down economy can be a good time to develop. Costs have fallen for construction, and professional services and permits can be faster. Of the medical school's new research building, Mr. Buerhrens said, ''We may bring this in under budget.''

Cambridge, where much life science research is related to biotechnology and information technology, has had a spike in lab availability to perhaps 28 percent versus zero in 2000, said Joseph T. Maguire, director of real estate for the Massachusetts Institute of Technology. Of M.I.T.'s three million square feet of labs for rent, Mr. Maguire said, 15 percent is now available.

Some of the new Cambridge lab projects were started when the real estate market was stronger; some are already leased. But unlike Boston, where many labs focus on biomedical research, Cambridge's biotechnology companies are more reliant on the venture capital and securities markets, where investors have been cautious lately.

It may be bleak now, ''but the demand for science will rebound when capital markets bounce back,'' Mr. Maguire said.

According to Scott Morrison, United States life science leader for Ernst & Young, ''Over the long term, the Boston area will continue to be a center of excellence.''

The surge in academic growth seems to buttress that view. M.I.T., which owns and occupies 10.3 million square feet in 142 buildings on its Cambridge campus, has 2.24 million square feet under development in 9 buildings, a $1 billion investment, a spokeswoman said.

A few weeks ago, city officials approved a new master plan for Boston University, which owns and occupies 13 million square feet. It is building three projects with 518,000 square feet for $335 million: a lab, 220 units of housing and a sports complex. In the next three years, it hopes to develop more labs and a new law school, said Richard J. Towle, a university official.

Harvard is developing about 1.1 million square feet in nine buildings, according to university and city officials. City and state officials are trying to keep the Massachusetts Turnpike Authority from selling to the university the 91-acre freight rail yard adjacent to the Harvard Business School. The state is trying to take back a portion of the property.

Some smaller institutions like Emerson College have made significant contributions to the downtown commercial property market here. Since 1992, Emerson has invested $225 million to move its entire campus from the residential Back Bay to the long-derelict theater district. The school injected vitality into the neighborhood, and major commercial development followed. Now, it hopes that its last big project, a $75 million dormitory, will be well timed.

''If we can start building during the next academic year, we can save about 20 percent on the cost,'' said Robert A. Silverman, Emerson's vice president for finance and administration. ''This opportunity won't last.''

COMMERCIAL REAL ESTATE  Correction:  May 10, 2003, Saturday  A picture caption in Business Day on Wednesday with an article about the development of Boston area buildings in niche markets, like life science research and academia, misstated the location of Harvard's new biotechnology building. It is in Boston, not Cambridge.
