Five people filed suit yesterday against the Suffolk County police, saying they were kidnapped, falsely arrested, threatened and, in some cases, physically abused last month by detectives pursuing confessions in the unsolved slaying of a Manhattan financier, Theodore Ammon.

The plaintiffs are relatives or acquaintances of Daniel Pelosi, a Long Island electrician who married Mr. Ammon's widow, Generosa, three months after Mr. Ammon, 52, was found bludgeoned to death in October 2001. The police have named no suspects in the killing, which occurred in Mr. Ammon's East Hampton vacation home, but the suit says they appear eager to ''fix blame'' on Mr. Pelosi, 39.

''The purpose was to terrorize and coerce these folks into saying something, anything, that might incriminate a man named Daniel Pelosi,'' the plaintiffs' lawyer, Mike Shaw, said at a news conference yesterday in Manhattan. ''It was a terrifying thing for them.''

Suffolk police officials said they had not seen the complaint and would conduct their own investigation, though some doubted the veracity of the claims.

''Our detectives would never commit a crime in their effort to solve a crime,'' said Phil Robilotti, chief of department of the Suffolk County police. ''Kidnapping, the last time I looked, was a very serious felony. That's ludicrous.''

The lawsuit, filed in Federal District Court in Brooklyn and first reported yesterday in Newsday, casts new attention on a case that initially fueled tabloid speculation about Mr. Pelosi and Mrs. Ammon, but faded from headlines as police failed to make any arrests.

At the time of Mr. Ammon's death, there was much by way of intrigue. A man worth more than $80 million who was the chairman of Jazz at Lincoln Center, Mr. Ammon was close to reaching a divorce settlement with his wife, who now goes by the name Generosa Pelosi. Mr. Pelosi is in jail on unrelated drunken-driving charges.

The lawsuit names 6 defendents and 19 ''John Does'' -- officers whom the plaintiffs could not identify and who may be among the named defendants. There are 17 detectives on the Suffolk homicide squad, Detective Lt. Jack Fitzpatrick said.

The plaintiffs claim that on April 4 and 5, their civil rights were violated when they were taken into custody -- three of them on unsubstantiated charges ranging from the Ammon murder to interfering with the murder investigation. They were subjected to interrogations that lasted from 6 to 15 hours, in which detectives demanded that they make or sign statements implicating Mr. Pelosi, according to the suit.

During the interrogations, the plaintiffs were denied access to their lawyers and then forced to sign documents that relinquished their rights, the complaint says.

The plaintiffs are Mr. Pelosi's ex-wife, Tamara A. Pelosi; his cousin Frank J. Perrone; and three of Mr. Pelosi's acquaintances, Christopher E. Parrino, Alexander Mawyer and Arnold Cherubino. All are Suffolk residents, except Mr. Perrone, who is from Queens. Their lawyer said they would not comment, and efforts to reach them by phone were unsuccessful.

According to the complaint, the plaintiffs were either lured from their homes by the police or apprehended while driving and led into unmarked cars by armed officers.

Tamara Pelosi was driving on the Long Island Expressway to her job as a preschool director when an officer pulled her over for failing to signal a lane change, the suit says. She was charged with an unsubsantiated count of theft of electrical services, said her lawyer, Mr. Shaw.

During her interrogation at a police station in East Yaphank, one detective yelled that she ''knew what happened'' in the Ammon murder and had better tell it, the complaint says. Ms. Pelosi later fell to the floor in a panic attack, the suit says.

Another plaintiff, Mr. Parrino, 35, a carpenter and electrician, was pulled over by the police while driving to a diner, the complaint says, and the officers handcuffed him and told him he was under arrest for murder. When he asked if he could call his lawyer, the suit says, a detective told him to shut his mouth.

Later, when Mr. Parrino asked again, a detective struck him on the back of his head, according to the complaint, which said the detective threatened, ''If you won't talk, we will charge you with murder.''

Mr. Parrino was let go after the East Hampton police charged him with making a false statement in an unrelated drunken-driving case, the complaint says.

Mr. Shaw said the police's actions reflected a ''culture of awful arrogance.''

''I don't think desperation is the right word for it,'' he said. ''I think it was an extraordinarily dangerous and stupid thing for them to have done.''
