THE big black-and-white Akita sat at the end of the second row of cages, silent and still amid the raucous chorus of jumping, barking dogs at the Connecticut K-9 Education Center in Newington. Most of the other yelping dogs up for adoption are waiting for a home. But the Akita has more offers than it can handle.

Two weeks ago, it was an anonymous two-year-old purebred dog owned by Roosevelt Rhodes of Hartford, a man who has what Hartford police said is an extensive criminal record. Mr. Rhodes added one more arrest to his police file on April 29 when he chained his dog to his truck after the animal urinated in the cab of the vehicle. He dragged it through the streets of North Hartford, deaf to the screams of horrified children and entreaties from other witnesses. After several blocks, he finally heeded the pleas and stopped.

The police arrived, charged Mr. Rhodes with animal cruelty and impounded the dog.

The Akita, named Socks, became an instant celebrity. Dozens of those determined to adopt the dog first called the Hartford Police Department's animal control unit. The unit's voice mail was full by the second day. Then a local newspaper reported the dog had been taken to a veterinary clinic in Windsor to be treated for wounds to its paws, so calls flowed in to the three animal hospitals in town in an attempt to track it down.

''We've had tons of calls from people trying to find the dog,'' said a beleaguered employee of the Windsor Animal Clinic, which did not have the dog.

The Hartford Police Department uses the Kennedy Road Veterinary Clinic for its injured animals, but by the time people figured that out, the dog had been moved to the K-9 Education Center, where the police department rents space for abandoned dogs, and the word had spread that the Akita was not -- not yet anyway -- available for adoption.

If it were, it probably would have offers from one of the Hartford Police Department's four animal control officers, who are known as soft touches for animals in need. Officer Ed Grodecki adopted two abandoned puppies a few weeks ago. He also owns a rescued Labrador retriever. Over the course of his 16 years with animal control, he has owned three other dogs thatwere either abandoned or abused.

''But this is only the second, in all those years, that was dragged,'' he said. ''And that fella didn't get his dog back.''

The folks at the K-9 Education Center are even softer in the soft-touch department. A former Newington animal control officer, Robert Schatz, opened the center, which is also a private kennel and daycare service for dogs, a few decades ago.

One employee at the center, Scott Beebe, recently held an abandoned baby squirrel, which he had been feeding using an eye-dropper. He told the story of a 4-foot-long iguana that the police had found roaming the streets of Hartford.

''Those things get so big they surprise people, and the owners end up throwing them out the window,'' he said.

Mr. Beebe found a home in Vermont for the iguana. Another employee has progressively adopted two ducks, a hawk and another iguana, in addition to various dogs.

''We have animals that have been stabbed or starved,'' said an employee at the center's desk who did not want to be identified. ''People leave dogs in apartments when they move.''

After only two months on the job, after cooing to one too many resident canines, she adopted a dog from the center.

''Now I try not to go downstairs as often as I used to,'' she said.

The Akita's fate will not be known until May 13, when Mr. Rhodes is due to appear in Hartford Superior Court.

Last week (May 4 to May 10) was Be Kind to Animals Week, courtesy of the American Humane Society. The week is designated to teach compassionate attitudes toward animals throughout the world.

''This is a very friendly animal,'' said Detective Winston Brooks, a spokesman for the Hartford Police Department, as he watched the healed Akita being walked outside the K-9 education center recently. ''I would hope the court would do the proper thing.''

What the right thing was Detective Brooks wouldn't say, but one look at his face gazing sympathetically at the dog made his sentiment easy enough to decipher.
