Blacks and other minority shoppers at Macy's are more likely to be detained on suspicion of shoplifting than whites, according to a civil rights lawsuit filed yesterday in Federal District Court in Manhattan.

The lawsuit, which seeks class-action status, claims that employees at Macy's flagship store in Herald Square singled out a black woman while she was shopping last December, handcuffed and detained her in a holding cell, and pressured her to make a false confession, even though she had presented receipts for the items she had bought.

Lawyers representing the woman, Sharon Simmons-Thomas of the Bronx, say the incident is symptomatic of a pattern of racial profiling at Macy's stores throughout New York City.

''It was the worst thing I've ever gone through,'' Ms. Simmons-Thomas, 40, said tearfully during a news conference on West 34th Street outside Macy's yesterday. ''I felt alone and scared.''

Macy's officials would not comment on the lawsuit, but released a statement saying that the store does ''not profile, target or discriminate against any minority group or individual.''

Ms. Simmons-Thomas's lawyers said they had interviewed more than two dozen other people with similar claims of discrimination at Macy's and Bloomingdale's stores. For now, the lawsuit names only Macy's and its parent company, Federated Department Stores Inc., as defendants, but could later be amended to include Bloomingdale's, the lawyers said, if plaintiffs claim that that store illegally detained them.

Officials at Federated, which also owns Bloomingdale's, declined to comment on the lawsuit.

The suit alleges that Macy's and its parent company violated Ms. Simmons-Thomas's civil rights and accuses the defendants of defamation, false imprisonment, assault and battery, and negligent hiring, training and supervision. The suit asks for $100 million in compensatory and punitive damages.

Ms. Simmons-Thomas, a single mother who works as a legal secretary in Manhattan, said she was on her way home from work on Dec. 17 when she visited Macy's flagship store. She wanted to shop for Christmas gifts and return some items she had bought three days earlier, all in the cookware department.

After she returned three pots and bought two pans and a bakeware set, two plainclothes security guards surrounded her and accused her of shoplifting, according to the lawsuit.

Ms. Simmons-Thomas promptly showed the guards her receipts, said one of her lawyers, Kenneth P. Thompson, but they still escorted her through crowds of shoppers to a detention area on the store's balcony level.

''It should have stopped right there,'' Mr. Thompson said. ''She had the receipts in her hand.'' The guards led her to a holding cell, conducted a pat-down search of her body and handcuffed her to a bench for over an hour after threatening to handcuff her hands behind her back, the suit says, treatment that provides grounds for the assault and battery complaint. There, she saw five other detainees, none of whom were white, she said.

One guard continuously ridiculed Ms. Simmons-Thomas, who has no criminal history, ignoring her requests to leave so she could retrieve her 9-year-old daughter from a baby sitter, the suit says. The guard later boasted that Macy's would be thrilled ''because we caught seven of them today,'' according to the suit.

The guards tried to force Ms. Simmons-Thomas to sign a false confession, but she refused, the lawsuit says. Macy's did not press charges. The guards kept her pots and bakeware, worth $40, and told her not to return to the store for seven years, the suit says.
