ONLY a short while ago, Harry and Lois Kemp's house stood in Hopkinton, R.I. Then North Stonington, which borders Hopkinton, remapped its boundaries earlier this year using global satellite photos and found that the Kemps belonged to Connecticut.

Now the two towns are skirmishing over the question of where the state line lies, as the Rhode Island and Connecticut attorneys general push legislation designed to stop the dispute. "I'm the only one here who is happy about this change," said Mr. Kemp, who prefers North Stonington schools and its local government. "Everybody else is upset."

Over the course of Connecticut history, citizens have been shot, stabbed, scalped and doubly taxed over border disagreements. Novels and nonfiction works have been written about them. A protracted war was fought. Definitive boundary surveys were performed using the latest technology, only to be undone by even later technology. Nationally, the United States Supreme Court still hears boundary disputes between states, even as the government continues to squabble over its maritime borders with Canada.

The Connecticut-Rhode Island border was disputed all through the 17th and 18th centuries. Farmers on both sides of the line brought their scythes to one dispute, cutting at one another as they might cut their tall grass. Then they began bringing their firearms, resulting in equally bloody confrontations.

Now the battle for boundaries is back, as satellite mapping systems afford even greater accuracy in determining borders and as towns strapped for cash from state and federal budget cuts look for ways to pull in a few more dollars. North Stonington gained about 22 acres, and $15,000 in taxes from its remapping, said the town's tax assessor, Joyce Elias. That means 42 pieces of property, including eight houses that were either partly or completely in Rhode Island, and that are now in Connecticut.

Of course, that's if North Stonington actually gets to annex those properties, which means it will have to tread on the unyielding form of the Hopkinton tax assessor, John Majeika.

''They are using satellite photos and researching all the deeds, old deeds that say the boundary lies from the corner of the oak tree to the corner of the stone walls to the pile of stones, and the tree has died, the stone wall is gone and the pile of stones has been moved,'' Mr. Majeika said. ''Common sense is missing in this case; you're uprooting people's lives. We think the border should be where it stands.''

Mr. Majeika has made a crusade of uncovering boundary markers to determine the true line between Connecticut and Rhode Island, although in some cases, the markers are just adding to the mystery. One resides right next to a busy strip of Route 216. It is an unmarked stone tablet, leaning like the Tower of Pisa in its spot. Then earlier this month, a resident on Route 216 called Mr. Majeika to report the discovery of yet another, newer marker, across the street from the first one. A few days later, Mr. Majeika stood over his newest discovery, wiping away years of compacted soil and debris to unearth ''CHO Baseline.''

''I have no idea what that means,'' he said, estimating that the marker is from the 1940's. ''Who would put a baseline marker here, when 100 feet away we have a boundary marker? I have to figure out where this fits in the puzzle.''

A few streets away, two small boundary markers set 60 feet apart in Collette Angrisani's back yard on Kuehn Road may illustrate the core of the dispute. Satellite maps depend on fixed objects on the earth - such as Mrs. Angrisani's aging boundary markers -- to determine land boundaries. This means, in essence, that the new method still depends on the old one.

One marker, a 4-foot-high granite tablet, looks to be from a Connecticut-Rhode Island land survey taken in 1840. That survey was ratified by the legislatures of both states. The other, which lies about 60 feet from the 1840's tablet, is a smaller stone marker. It is stamped with the words ''U.S. Coast & Geodetic Survey and State Survey.'' That marker, Mr. Majeika said he believed, is the result of a 1940 survey done by Connecticut and Rhode Island, but interrupted by World War II. As a result, the survey was never ratified by either state's legislature.

Rhode Island has long honored the 1940 survey, which relied on the latest in surveying technology. Connecticut honors the 1840 survey, what Ms. Elias called ''the last ratified survey.'' Therein lies the first problem.

The second issue: Whether accuracy, or history, matters more. Last year, Killingly remapped its town and annexed slivers of land from 21 properties in Rhode Island. The move did not generate much in the way of consternation or publicity, because no houses were affected. Residents continued to send their children to neighborhood schools, continued to vote in Rhode Island. ''Nobody's actual address changed to Killingly,'' said Melissa Bonin, the Killingly tax assessor. ''Nobody came to live in Connecticut.''

Although towns differ on the philosophy of remapping, many legal opinions rest with history.

''Where you have states or countries that have long marked the line, built the fence, posted signs, and said 'this is where we think it is,' it's common sense to just leave it there,'' said John Briscoe, a California lawyer who specializes in international and domestic boundary issues. ''We don't need to encourage people to come up with innovative ideas for where else to put the line, although,'' he said with a laugh, ''it does make for gainful employment.''

Third, and probably of less concern to Connecticut residents than to Rhode Islanders: Rhode Island, already the smallest state in the nation, doesn't want to get any smaller. Hopkinton has even more to lose: Its taxes are $23.76 for every $1,000 of property owned, competing against a lower tax rate in North Stonington of $18 for every $1,000 of property.

Typically, state boundary disputes arrive at the doorstep of the United States Supreme Court.

''Our legal system is marvelous because it really has afforded peaceful means for resolving boundary disputes for more than 200 years,'' said Mr. Briscoe, who has worked on border agreements with Alaska, Hawaii, Georgia, California, and Kuwait after Iraq invaded the country in 1990.

But the attorneys general of Connecticut and Rhode Island are trying to avoid taking the issue there. Rather, they have taken it to their respective state legislatures, suggesting a joint commission to study the matter.

The commission, according to the attorneys' general proposal, would set boundaries on which the legislatures would vote. ''These boundaries would be set for all time, or at least until either the legislatures wanted to change them, or some other unanticipated event might occur,'' Richard Blumenthal, the Connecticut attorney general, said. ''The point is, this process would give finality and certainty to these boundaries. You know, the result here has to involve a combination of modern technology, good-old fashioned Yankee ingenuity and democratic principles.''

Neither legislature has acted on the matter.

The dispute also must involve a meeting of the minds of town officials in Rhode Island and Connecticut. Which marker is the right marker?

Those who think boundary disputes are pure foolishness may take a lesson from a mid-19th century border disagreement between Connecticut and New York. A half-mile wide panhandle known as the 'Oblong' extended south from the Massachusetts border, down the New York-Connecticut boundary line to Westchester County, then southeast for a few miles. Both states insisted they owned the property. The compromise: New York gained access to the Housatonic River through a pass of the Ten Mile River at Dover, N.Y. Connecticut acquired an eight-mile wide strip. It grew to become Connecticut's so-called ''Gold Coast'' in Fairfield County one of the most affluent areas of the United States.

At least there a compromise was reached peacefully. A century earlier, in the years before, during and after the American Revolution, a little-known but notorious war was fought between Connecticut settlers, known as Yankees, and Pennsylvanians, called Pennamites. The war began over a 1662 land grant by King Charles II of England to Connecticut: a strip of land that ran north to south from Long Island Sound upward about 70 miles, and east to west from the Rhode Island border to, incredibly, the Pacific Ocean. King Charles II, clearly confused about how the Americas were set up, granted Pennsylvania a charter 19 years later, giving that state the same lands. The Connecticut grant sat, mostly unused, until an enterprising real-estate group formed the Susquehanna Company in Hartford in 1768 and decided to expand westward.

Pennsylvanians did not welcome the Connecticut settlers. The British and certain tribes of Native Americans combined to out the settlers, the Native Americans scalping them, the British blasting them. The war was so long -- six years -- so bloody and so overlooked that Christopher Collier, the Connecticut state historian and professor emeritus of history at the University of Connecticut, was moved to write a novel about it, ''The Bloody Country,'' with his brother, James Lincoln Collier. A trial in 1784 determined that Pennsylvania owned the land, a determination with which Mr. Collier does not argue.

''I don't think you can undo history,'' he said. ''I think we ought to just allow the boundaries to stand. There's a legal concept called adverse possession, that holds if you've been using some land for 15 years or so and nobody has contested your use of that land and you think you own it, then you can claim it.''

He wished the attorneys general luck in pursuing the issue through the state legislatures.

''This is a case for the federal courts,'' he said. ''This does not seem to me to be an issue that either the General Assembly or the Rhode Island legislature can resolve.''
