UNTIL recently, Mark C. Fishman, 52, worked in a rarefied realm where clinical academic medicine meets basic scientific research. He was a professor at the Harvard Medical School, chief of cardiology at Massachusetts General Hospital and a geneticist who founded and ran the hospital's cardiovascular research center, which has a staff of 95.

Now, in a sharp career change, he is plunging into the corporate world as the president of the multibillion-dollar Novartis Institutes for Biomedical Research here. In March, he opened the first phase of the laboratory, the new global research center for Novartis.

''It's exhilarating,'' he said of his job and of his mandate to change the way the pharmaceutical industry finds new drugs. ''I'm pumped.''

Novartis, the sixth-largest maker of prescription drugs, produces Gleevec, a promising treatment for two forms of cancer that is being studied as a potential treatment for others. The company moved its main research operation here from Basel, Switzerland, to recruit more American researchers and to better serve the American market, the world's largest.

While he has no experience in developing drugs, Dr. Fishman is aiming to reinvent Novartis's research effort. He has been brought in to find ways to use new knowledge about the human genome to make drug devlopment more predictable than the traditional approach of market driven, trial-and-error experimentation.

He hopes to accelerate the development of drugs that treat fatal or debilitating illnesses, without wrenching side effects or hospitalization. ''We can open the next frontier of science after the human genome project to fundamentally change the way disease effects humans,'' Dr. Fishman said. ''The benefits will cascade through society.''

Daniel Vasella, the chief executive of Novartis, spent six months wooing Dr. Fishman to run the new lab, in which the company will invest about $4 billion over the next seven years.

Dr. Fishman said, ''I've never had a moment's doubt'' since accepting the job, which includes overseeing 2,600 other Novartis scientists around the world who do traditional drug research.

''I don't know why,'' he added with a smile. ''Any rational person would.''

Eric S. Lander, the director of the Whitehead Institute-Massachusetts Institute of Technology Center for Genome Research, said Novartis's gamble on genomics and its hiring of Dr. Fishman were a ''watershed move that sent tremors through the pharmaceutical industry.''

''This move says that the lifeblood of the industry is changing from chemistry to molecular biology, from art to engineering,'' he added.

Dr. Fishman's decision to leave academia for a corporate laboratory has impressed financial analysts as well as scientists.

''It's a bold move,'' said Catherine J. Arnold, a senior equity analyst at Sanford C. Bernstein, ''but it's aligned with Novartis's endgame: to gain share in the U.S. market and develop products for it.''

The United States already dominates Novartis's business, accounting for 43 percent of its revenue last year and 52 percent of its profit.

In 2002, its total revenue was $20.9 billion, up 11.4 percent from a year earlier -- though only 2 percent in terms of the Swiss franc, which strengthened against the dollar during the year; its net income was $4.7 billion, up from $4.2 billion.

By 2007, Ms. Arnold said, she expects American consumers to generate about half of Novartis's revenue and two-thirds of its profit.

To acknowledge the importance of the American market, the company began to issue its financial reports this year in dollars instead of in Swiss francs.

Dr. Vasella said Novartis was betting heavily, in time and money, that Dr. Fishman could build a team of 1,000 researchers to create a process for discovering biotechnology drugs.

''It doesn't matter that he's an industry outsider,'' Dr. Vasella said. ''He's a clinician with impeccable science credentials who's done impressive research; every other consideration was secondary.''

Dr. Fishman was the lead writer for the textbook ''Medicine'' (Lippincott Williams & Wilkins), now in its fifth edition. ''Science and medicine are my two loves,'' he said. The passion runs in his family. His father, Alfred P. Fishman of the University of Pennsylvania; his brother Jay A. Fishman of Massachusetts General; and his wife, Martha P. Fishman, of Children's Hospital here are physicians and researchers. Mark and Martha Fishman have two children, a son, 11, and daughter, 9.

He has left the academic world, but he is welcome to return anytime, said David C. Read, administrative director for cardiology at Massachusetts General.

Dr. Fishman said he wanted to change the research culture at Novartis to collaborate more with academia.

Dr. Edward J. Benz Jr., president of the Dana-Farber Cancer Institute in Boston, said, ''It's novel to embed pharmaceutical research alongside academic investigators working on the frontiers of science, but it's logical because the best advances come from serendipitous conversations between scientists.''

THESE days, Dr. Fishman runs between his office and a construction site to ensure that open meeting places that promote discussion permeate his labs. ''I've never been in a pharma lab, but I know I don't want stodgy, secretive space,'' he said.

''In business, I'm not an expert,'' he added, although he dismissed the notion that Novartis's new venture was a gamble.

''No one is taking a risk,'' he said. ''I'm exploring the scientific direction that will bring the most benefits to patients, and I'm sure I know how to do it.''

Private Sector
