James Lozier, a car salesman, began calling his customers yesterday morning with a great pitch: close the deal this week and save a few hundred dollars in sales taxes.

Before noon, three customers had agreed to wait no longer and buy a vehicle from the Manhattan Auto Group on the West Side, which sells Lincoln Town Cars, Jaguars and other vehicles by Ford.

''It's boosting the sales for this month,'' Mr. Lozier said. ''For next month, it's a different story. That little raise might stop customers from buying cars.''

That ''little raise'' is the increase in state and city sales taxes that will take effect in New York beginning next week, but incrementally, much to the confusion of shoppers and the ire of merchants, who must recalibrate their registers twice.

The state sales tax is scheduled to go up one-quarter of a percentage point on Sunday. Some time on or after next Wednesday, the city sales tax will rise by one-eighth of a percentage point, meaning that New York City residents will pay a combined sales tax of 8.625 instead of the current 8.25 percent.

Starting Sunday, the state will also reinstate taxes on clothing and shoes that cost less than $110 per item, a blow to stores in the city, where those items are now tax-free, even though other localities continued to apply their own sales taxes.

''New York City was one of the few remaining areas that truly was tax-free shopping,'' said James. R. Sherin, chief operating officer of the Retail Council of New York State, a trade association based in Albany that represents retailers . ''It's going to possibly drive people back onto the bridges and back onto the Internet in search of tax-free clothes. It's a major change in the tax landscape.''

The city had hoped to increase its sales tax on Sunday, but because of bureaucratic miscues and legal technicalities, the city now stands to miss the target date, confusing consumers and angering merchants.

''It's a shame if there is some confusion, but we'll work it out,'' Mayor Michael R. Bloomberg said. ''It is, I think, a small thing in the grand scheme of things, an annoyance. Probably shouldn't have happened. I don't know how it did.''

For weeks, Mr. Bloomberg and the City Council speaker, Gifford Miller, spoke about June 1 as the start date for the tax increase. Mr. Miller even threatened to miss that deadline unless the mayor agreed to hold off on some budget cuts. But in the end, they reached a deal, and the Council voted to enact the tax at its meeting on Wednesday.

There was just one hitch: City law requires bills to ''age'' five working days before they can be signed by the mayor, so the earliest that Mr. Bloomberg can sign the bill into law is next Wednesday. Even then, city officials realized belatedly, it could take several days for the tax increase to take effect.

The city stands to lose more than $300,000 each day the increase is delayed, not to mention the good will of buyers and sellers.

Some aides to the mayor grumbled quietly that the Council should have passed the bill earlier. Council officials countered that they had not been asked to and that Bloomberg administration officials had told them that acting by last Wednesday was soon enough.

On a positive note for shoppers, lawmakers allowed two sales-tax-free weeks within a year. The first will begin on the Tuesday before Labor Day, Aug. 26, and run through the end of the day on Labor Day, Sept. 1, said an aide to Joseph L. Bruno, the Republican majority leader in the State Senate.

The second week will run from Jan. 26 through Feb. 1, 2004, said Michael E. Marr, a spokesman for the State Department of Taxation and Finance.

The sales-tax increase worried different merchants in different ways. For Willie Rivera, the sales manager at Circuit City in Union Square, the increase could mean a surplus of flat-panel plasma televisions.

Buyers already balk at the roughly $450 in sales taxes that come with the store's ''hottest thing,'' which costs $5,000 to $6,000, Mr. Rivera said. Many buyers from New Jersey ask that the televisions be shipped to their homes, allowing them to trade the New York sales tax for New Jersey's.

''The inventory at our store won't replenish, and we're going to be stuck with a lot of product,'' he said.

For Dane Reid, an assistant store manager at the discount clothing chain H & M on Broadway in SoHo, the worry is that customers will no longer bother to shop in New York.

''Why should you when you're going to pay transportation plus sales taxes?'' Mr. Reid said. ''There's no reason to come shopping in New York if you live in Long Island.''

His store will probably be hit hard by the reinstatement of taxes on items that cost less than $110, he said. For example, a customer who now buys $180 in clothes tax-free will be saddled with about $15 in sales taxes when the full tax increase takes effect.

Merchants and shoppers at expensive stores expressed less worry about the tax increase.

''I could care less,'' said Christina Gergis, 24, as she breezed through a dress rack at the Anna Sui store on Greene Street in SoHo. ''It's necessary. It pays for things in the city.''

''We are high-end,'' said Elyse Denman, a saleswoman at the minimalist jewelry store Stuart Moore, in SoHo. ''We feel that raising the tax a little bit will not affect a high-end clientele.''

To Louis K. Meisel, the owner of an art gallery on Prince Street in SoHo, the most troubling aspect of the increase is the day-to-day math involved with 8.625 percent.

Who ''is going to be able to figure that one out?'' he said, laughing. ''When it was an even number you could figure it out in your head.''
