The makers of the ephedra supplement that was implicated in the death of a Baltimore Orioles pitcher must return $12.5 million in profits on sales of the substance in California, a judge ruled yesterday in a false-advertising suit in San Diego.

The judgment, against Cytodyne Technologies of Manasquan, N.J., is the latest in a mounting tide of costly lawsuits against manufacturers of the supplement. The company issued a statement saying it would appeal.

The class-action suit accused Cytodyne of deceiving consumers with claims of uniquely effective and substantial weight loss. The verdict represents all of the profit the company made in California from 1997 to 2001 on its ephedra product, Xenadrine RFA-1.

''The court is telling the defendant it's not going to allow them to deceive California consumers and make money doing it,'' said James Frantz, the lawyer who filed the suit against Cytodyne.

The judge, Ronald L. Styn of San Diego Superior Court, found that Cytodyne's advertising was not supported by scientific research. It systematically excluded, misstated and overstated scientific findings, and pushed researchers it commissioned to cast findings in the most favorable light, Judge Styn ruled.

A typical claim, that Xenadrine users had a 3,860 percent greater fat loss, was based on a small company-financed study that found that users lost 1.93 percent of their body fat, while those who did not use it lost 0.05 percent. Such claims are a ''distortion'' intended to mislead consumers, Judge Styn said.

Cytodyne argued that its claims were supported by its science, and that the hyperbole of its advertising was simply ''puffery'' of a sort commonly indulged in by other manufacturers.

''These ads run in the back of bodybuilding magazines, and they tend to be very hyperbolic,'' Mark Mazzarella, the lawyer for Cytodyne, said. ''There's nothing illegal about puffing.''

The judge ordered the money to be put into a pool for distribution to consumers. He did not specify how it should be distributed.

The case is the first verdict against the ephedra industry for false advertising. A number of users who claim they were injured by use of the amphetamine-like substance have won product-liability lawsuits, and many manufacturers, including Cytodyne, have stopped making ephedra products.

''It's not a big company, and this is a huge hit,'' Mr. Mazzarella said of the judgment against Cytodyne.

The company sold $50 million worth of weight loss pills in the last year, some with ephedra and some without, according to Information Resources Inc., a market research firm.

After years of defeating efforts to regulate ephedra, the supplements industry has been on the defensive since the death of an Orioles pitcher, Steve Bechler, 23, in February. The authorities determined that his death was connected to his use of Xenadrine.

Illinois passed a ban on the substance last week, and the California State Assembly is considering a similar bill. The secretary of health and human services, Tommy G. Thompson, has said he may ban the substance, pending a review of public comments.
