IN case you haven't yet been introduced, meet Connecticut's new state fish.

It has suffered from declining numbers, waning popularity and is filled with an abundance of pesky bones, but what it lacks in accessibility, it makes up for with determination. Even its name has a kind of blunt inevitability about it: shad.

After several years and two failed attempts in the state's General Assembly, legislators have designated the species as the state's first official fish, placing it on the same marquee with the official state insect (the European mantis), state mineral (garnet) and state shellfish (the Eastern oyster), among other more prominent official state things.

Now that Gov. John G. Rowland has signed the bill, Connecticut -- with its 100 miles of shoreline and ample waterways -- will finally have a state fish, leaving only seven remaining states without an official fish and making Connecticut the only one to claim the shad.

''Some people love it,'' said State Representative Faith McMahon, a Democrat from Windsor who sponsored the shad bill in the state House of Representatives. ''Some people think it's too fishy. The roe is a delicacy on par with caviar. But it's more the spirit of the shad that's important. It speaks to our good old Yankee ingenuity. It's a symbol of survival.''

For the shad, aka the ''poor man's salmon,'' the channel to official status and popular acceptance has been rough. Within the last five weeks, both houses of the Legislature overwhelmingly passed bills in favor of the shad, delighting shad fans but angering others.

''I can't believe the leadership thinks it's important to take our time, our staff time, to debate the naming of the state fish when we're facing an $800 million budget deficit,'' said State Senator John McKinney, a Republican of Fairfield, who was one of three senators to vote against the bill. ''I think it's utterly ridiculous.''

Mr. McKinney added: ''I understand the history of the shad in the Connecticut River, but there are legislators living on Long Island Sound, all the way from Greenwich to New London, who don't think the shad is the great Connecticut fish. We argued for other fish.''

State Representative Raymond Collins, a Republican of West Haven, offered three amendments to the house shad bill, each one proposing ''American shad'' be stricken from the bill and ''bluefish,'' ''striped bass'' or ''Atlantic salmon'' be added instead.

''I also had plans for sunnies,'' Mr. Collins said.

Supporters in the Legislature said they understood the designation might be seen as superfluous given the tough issues facing the state.

''I don't want to get too philosophical,'' said State Representative Melissa Olson, a Democrat of Norwich. ''Obviously it's a difficult budget time, but I think it resonated that the shad never left Connecticut through thick and thin. That appealed to people.''

State Senator Tony Guglielmo, a Republican of Stafford, who sponsored the bill in the senate, said he wasn't surprised by some of his colleagues' reactions. ''Some of the people in the Senate and House thought, with all that's going on in the world, this was frivolous,'' Mr. Guglielmo said. ''Sure, it's not going to improve western civilization as we know it, but it does have some political significance. People feel pretty strongly about it. It's not like we were debating this and we tabled the budget.''

''A few years ago there was a pretty fierce battle over the state fruit,'' he added. ''The grape and apple people went crazy.'' (There is still no official state fruit.)

Devotees of the shad now say they are thrilled the fish is getting its due.

''I taught in Windsor for 35 years,'' said Ms. McMahon, who represents the town, along with neighboring Bloomfield. ''I have taught the history of Connecticut in Windsor, which was the first town in Connecticut despite what Wethersfield says. I always tell the kids it was really the shad that allowed the settlers to stay in Windsor. The Native Americans taught them how to salt shad and use it as fertilizer. It was very important to Connecticut.''

For the last 49 years, Windsor has celebrated the fish with its annual Shad Derby, where it crowns a shad queen and holds other shad-related events. The derby, according to Mr. Guglielmo, is one of seven shad-centric events held around the state, including the Shad Festival at the Connecticut River Museum in Essex, which resurrected the event in 2002 after many years in hiatus, bringing fresh attention to the shad.

''Everyone has their own pet fish; some senator has his pet guppy, '' said Joe Zaientz, a retired dentist, shad fisherman and director of the Haddam Shad Museum. ''But somehow, this year, it all gelled for the shad.''

The Haddam Shad Museum, a 15-by-15-foot former ''Shad Shack'' in Higganum is filled with artifacts of the state's relationship with the humble fish and mementos of the people who love it. Lying on one table is a photograph of the grave of H. John Schreier, whose headstone in a Cromwell cemetery says ''Beloved Husband, Dad and Pa, Longtime Shad Fisherman.'' Hand-drawn maps of shad fishing spots hang on the walls, along with a poster that says, ''Support the American Shad for Connecticut's State Fish,'' made when a group of local shad enthusiasts pushed unsuccessfully for official designation some years ago.

Richard Johnson, a filmmaker who made a documentary released last year entitled ''A Passion for Shad,'' said he was not sure why it took so long for the shad to earn its place of honor.

''I guess it was because there were so many of them and they were so hard to de-bone,'' he said.

Now, Mr. Johnson noted, there are far fewer shad, and ''deboning is an art form which could be lost if future generations don't learn it.''

Dorothy Goss of Westbrook, known as Dot, is one of the few remaining expert de-boners in the state and has been deboning shad -- which have about 1,000 bones each -- for nearly 50 years.

''It really is a passion,'' said Ms. Goss, adding, ''I have this great feeling for the shad, I don't know why that is.''

She said, almost dreamily, ''When you see them, all in the net, all silver, it's just gorgeous.''

''I'm hoping this will bring attention to the shad fishery,'' she added.

It appears to have done just that.

''Now there's so much attention focused on this fish, it's incredible,'' said Barbara Gordon, of the Connecticut Seafood Council. ''It's already influenced shad sales.''

The shad fishing season lasts from April 1 to June 15 -- the approximate window in which shad run up the Connecticut River from the ocean to spawn -- and these days the numbers running upstream are higher than they've been in years.

The shad population started to decline in the 1700's, with the damming of local waterways, but in the 1960's and 1970's, with the dismantling of dams, the fish started returning to the Connecticut River in greater numbers. Recently, with the installation of fish ladders, they have started spawning up some smaller rivers and streams, too.

''I'll let other people judge whether the shad is a good state fish,'' said Stephen Gephard, of the state's environmental protection department. ''But I'll say this: Shad are found in salt and fresh water; they're found in every county, historically. They're native, unlike brown trout and large mouth bass. They're still here, and they never left.''

''The fact that they're coming back sends a message,'' Mr. Gephard added. ''In the 300 years since white people have been in Connecticut, we've degraded the environment, we've clear-cut the trees and polluted the waterways. Now, the environment is coming back. We have turkeys, ospreys, eagles, bear, deer. The shad is a symbol of that trend.''

John McPhee, a Pulitzer Prize-winning writer and avid shad fisherman, wrote a book about the shad and its place in American history called ''The Founding Fish,'' published last year.

''I'm away on a shad-fishing trip, sorry to be so slow,'' he wrote in a recent e-mail message after being asked to comment about shad.

''No matter how it got elected,'' Mr. McPhee continued, ''it deserves to be honored in Connecticut, where so many individuals of the species, after swimming 10 thousand miles in the ocean, come home.''
