Steps from the pantyhose section of Macy's Manhattan store sits a cool, halogen-lighted room containing two chain-link holding cells. People, some of them minors, are led to this room every day, where they are body-searched, photographed and then handcuffed to a long steel bench.

An interrogation occurs, and a verdict is made as to whether or not they tried to steal. Their Social Security numbers are punched into a national database, and they are turned over to the police or they are freed. Almost all of them sign confessions and are asked to pay private penalties -- five times the amount of whatever they stole.

This private jail, and the policing system that governs it, is replicated to varying degrees in other department stores across the nation with a twofold purpose: to stop shoplifting and to recoup some of the billions of dollars lost to theft every year.

Last year, more than 12,000 people moved through detention rooms in 105 of Macy's stores, including more than 1,900 at the Manhattan store, in Herald Square. Only 56 percent of those people were sent to the police. The company, though, says that over 95 percent of those detained confess to shoplifting and quite a few pay the in-store penalty before leaving. The Manhattan store lost $15 million to theft last year.

The operation is legally authorized, and, retailers say, necessary: private police fill the void left by public police too burdened to chase small-time thieves. Private police also save retailers legal costs by helping them settle shoplifting cases directly with the perpetrators .

But the elaborate systems like the one at Macy's in Manhattan -- which includes 100 security officers, four German shepherds, hundreds of cameras, and a closed-circuit television center reminiscent of a spaceship control room -- have highlighted a concern shared by a range of people, from civil libertarians to individual shoppers who have been detained, and even to some law enforcement officials.

Whether guilty or innocent, these critics say, those accused of shoplifting are often deprived of some of the basic assurances usually provided in public law enforcement proceedings: the right to legal representation before questioning, rigorous safeguards against coercion, particularly in the case of juveniles, and the confidence that the officers in charge are adequately trained and meaningfully monitored.

Private security operations in the retail world, like those in gated communities, amusement parks and sports stadiums, have grown in number over the last three decades yet remain largely shrouded from public scrutiny.

''The issue of private security guards is a difficult one,'' said Donna Lieberman, executive director of the New York Civil Liberties Union. ''On the one hand, stores have an interest in protecting their business. But on the other hand, security guards have neither the training nor the same legal obligations as police officers and the danger of interfering with individual rights is huge.''

Some retail chains have less-elaborate detention areas, using storage rooms or offices instead of jails, and some stores have more direct and regular dealings with police. Wal-Mart's policy, for instance, is to always contact the police when its security guards detain a suspected shoplifter, a company spokesman said. But aggressive policing is a daily staple of the retail industry, with most major retail stores employing some version of the detention and civil recovery procedures used by Macy's.

''That's standard operating procedure in virtually every store in America,'' said Dr. Richard Hollinger, a sociologist and criminologist at the University of Florida who compiles information about theft-prevention tactics from stores nationwide for a yearly report.

Law enforcement officials in New York, including the state attorney general, said they knew very little about the details and scope of the kind of security operation being run at Macy's. Officials in Attorney General Eliot Spitzer's office were not aware of any complaints against retail security operations, but have investigated other forms of private policing and said the practice can lead to serious problems.

The security operations in place at stores like Macy's have provoked litigation. Last month, Macy's was sued by a Bronx paralegal and other people with a range of claims about how Macy's polices shoplifting -- from racial profiling to false imprisonment. They are represented by Kenneth P. Thompson, a former federal prosecutor.

In 1997, a jury awarded another shopper, Paula Hampton, $1.16 million for race discrimination when she was detained at a Kansas Dillard's store. That same year, a jury ordered Eddie Bauer to pay $1 million to three men in Maryland for false imprisonment and other charges.

A Look Behind the Scenes

Macy's officials said the recent charges against them were reckless, and they ardently defended their security practices as lawful, professional and exacting in their ability to weed out thieves among innocent shoppers. To counter allegations of unfairness, the store allowed a reporter wide behind-the-scenes access to its Manhattan store, the company's flagship.

To tour the store is to appreciate the immense security challenge faced by Macy's, as well as the potential for intimidation among those detained.

Plainclothes ''detectives'' roam the 10 selling floors, keeping in contact with uniformed guards by radio. The movement of shoppers is tracked by over 300 cameras, some controlled by joysticks, as security workers watch images on dozens of closed-circuit television monitors.

Those shoplifting suspects caught and detained are taken to ''Room 140,'' which features a long steel bench bolted to the linoleum floor. A dozen handcuffs hang off the bench from chains. In two holding cells, roughly 5 feet long by 5 feet wide, wooden benches bear the etchings of former detainees. ''Not worth it,'' reads one.

Macy's policy is to call the police if anyone requests legal representation or asks to be set free immediately, but most people prefer to settle the matter privately, officials said.

No department store is legally required to provide the same safeguards as are the police. Legal experts say that retailers are held to a standard somewhere in between that of the police and that of citizens making an arrest -- a standard known as merchants' privileges, which allow stores around the nation to detain people on suspicion of shoplifting without police involvement.

''We at Macy's East are sensitive to the fact that we're not a police force operating in the criminal justice system,'' said Thomas Roan, group vice president for security at Macy's East. ''Therefore we raise the standard for detention'' above the one used by the police to detain and question people.

The jail is not excessive, Mr. Roan said, given the number of altercations with shoplifting suspects. In the last four months, 25 people have assaulted security officials, 10 of whom required medical attention, Mr. Roan said. In about half of all apprehensions, weapons are recovered, including knives and guns, he added.

But the main reason for such a sophisticated system is to fight the enemy of theft. Some 60,000 people pass through the flagship store every day -- and on heavy shopping days, double or triple that number. About $100 million was lost last year to thieves in the 105 stores in the Eastern United States that make up Macy's East.

As a result, Macy's spends roughly $28 million a year on security -- $4 million at the flagship store alone.

In an attempt to recover some of the loss, Macy's has a target of $1.4 million in civil penalties it expects to receive this year -- the same amount received last year. To achieve that, it uses a formidable weapon used by stores around the nation: civil recovery statutes.

These laws allow retailers to hold shoplifters liable for the cost of catching them and for the losses they cause, charging penalties even if an item is recovered in perfect condition. In New York, the statute is especially powerful, allowing stores to demand five times the value of the item stolen, whether or not there is a confession, and to pursue that claim even if the case is tried criminally and thrown out.

''Retailers have abandoned the criminal justice system because they know the system is not interested in them as a victim,'' Dr. Hollinger said.

But it is the manner in which Macy's enforces its pursuit of shoplifters, backed by these statutes, that is at the heart of the dispute between Macy's and critics of private security.

A Five-Step Approach

The store has a program to train its guards to follow five steps before detaining a person: they must watch the person enter a department, select merchandise and conceal it; then maintain unbroken surveillance to establish that the item is concealed; and then watch the person attempt to leave the store without paying.

''Nonproductive detentions'' -- the company's phrase for innocent people wrongly detained -- occur less than 1 percent of the time, and result in disciplinary action, store officials said. Thirty-two security guards were fired last year from Macy's East stores for wrongly detaining 66 people, and 43 other security associates were disciplined.

But the suit brought last month by Sharon Simmons-Thomas, and others, who are represented by Mr. Thompson, a partner at the Manhattan law firm of Thompson Wigdor & Gilly, paints a much more menacing picture.

The detention system is predatory and racially biased, Mr. Thompson claimed, with security guards using racial codes to alert one another that a minority shopper has entered an area.

The lawyers said that 13 current or former security officials at Macy's have assisted in the lawsuit. One former worker, who spoke on the condition of anonymity for fear of reprisal, said he thought the store set quotas for how many people should be detained on a given day. ''At one time they put the numbers on the walls,'' said the man, who worked at Herald Square and left in a dispute.

Macy's officials called the charges baseless: officials do use numbers of detentions from the previous year as a guide to what kind of activity to expect, they said, but not to pressure guards; security officials must sign a code of conduct that prohibits racial profiling; and race and gender codes are used only for description purposes when guards communicate among themselves.

But the question of what happens once people are detained has provoked the greatest concerns.

In the in-store jail, most people confess that they stole once presented with evidence, Macy's security officials said. If they sign a confession, the store gives them the option of paying their penalty right away. Those who confess also sign a notice that allows the police to charge them with a felony if they are caught shoplifting in the store again.

But because the confessions are won in secret, and by officials with far less experience than government police departments, many regard them as potentially suspect.

''If someone is arrested by police, they know they're going to court, they know they're going to get a lawyer, they know they're going to tell their story to a judge, they know if they're innocent that within a short period of time they're going to be talking to someone who can help them,'' said Susan Hendricks, deputy attorney in charge of the criminal defense division of the Legal Aid Society.

The former security official said people were given the impression that if they signed confessions, they would not be prosecuted.

Who Gets Prosecuted

''This is how they give them a light at the end of the tunnel that this might end at the store,'' he said.

Macy's security officials said they painstakingly trained their staff to first decide whether to prosecute a person before the issue of civil recovery is broached.

Discretion is used in whether to prosecute a shoplifter based on a range of ''mercy'' factors, including a person's age and health and whether the person has been cooperative. Sometimes, the local police tell Macy's security they are too overbooked to process any more cases, Macy's officials said.

New York police officials denied this. ''When we are called, we respond,'' said Lt. Brian Burke, a department spokesman. But another police official acknowledged that if large department stores chose to call the police every time they caught someone shoplifting, the department would be swamped.

The current lawsuit against Macy's includes the kind of disputed account that many regard as unsurprising in the world of private security.

A Disputed Transaction

Two other plaintiffs, Barbie Sanchez, 16, and Jennifer Velez, 17, who are longtime friends, said they visited the flagship store last Oct. 5 to exchange a pink blouse for Miss Sanchez's mother, but were unable to because they lacked a receipt. When the girls tried to leave, they say, security guards stopped them, grabbed their shopping bags and led them to Room 140.

The girls said they were pressured to say they had stolen the blouse and other clothing. After two hours, the girls said, a man told them to sign some forms or they would be ''in more trouble.''

They signed the forms. Soon, they received letters from a Florida law firm, retained by Macy's to collect on its behalf, seeking more than $400.

''If we shoplifted,'' Miss Velez asked in an interview, ''why didn't they send a cop to pick us up? They think you have no rights.''

A lawyer for Macy's said he could not comment on the girls' specific claims because of the litigation.

He did say, though, ''We are absolutely confident when all the evidence is in, it will be clear that we follow our policies and only detain people that we see stealing and attempting to leave the store.''
