Sammy Sosa provided fuel for the fans' jeering and jesting at U.S. Cellular Field this afternoon. In fact, Sosa was the fuel and the fire, his bat-corking incident giving White Sox fans an object for merciless derision in this annual matchup of hometown rivals.

From right field, Sox fans like Eduardo Zavala, 30, hurled insults, waved signs and flailed their arms at Sosa.

From seemingly everywhere else, they taunted and booed Sosa as he entered and exited the field, all in the hopes of unsettling him and of winning bragging rights in a two-team town, where some insist there is room for only one.

Wearing a White Sox cap, Zavala, a broker at the Chicago Board of Trade, did not wait for the game to start to begin his taunting. After spotting Sosa on the field warming up before the White Sox defeated the Cubs, 7-6, he cupped his hands to his mouth and yelled in Spanish that Sosa was a cheater.

''It was an accident,'' Sean Piper, 25, a Cubs fan sitting nearby, protested, referring to the corked-bat incident. ''How are you going to call him a liar?''

''I'm not calling him a liar,'' Zavala answered, laughing. ''I'm calling him a cheater.''

On the field, for the second straight game, the White Sox had the answer in the ninth inning. D'Angelo Jimenez singled in Magglio Ordonez to give the White Sox the victory and the Cubs their fourth straight loss.

On Friday, Jose Valentin's ninth-inning homer gave the White Sox a 4-3 victory.

In the eighth inning today, Aaron Rowand's two-run homer in the eighth tied the score at 6-6. He hit it off Antonio Alfonseca, who gave up Valentin's homer Friday.

The announced attendance for today's game was 45,440, the fifth largest for a regular-season game at U.S. Cellular Field.

In the stands, there was no shortage of trash talking -- or of fans sporting cork. ''Got cork?'' read one sign. Some fans even wore cork as jewelry.

''There is no protection, no friendly confines,'' said Steve Zimmerman, 28, a White Sox fan, who tailgated with his friend Darren Miles, 26, before the game. The two admitted to partaking in the ribbing of Sosa, but they contended that it was nothing personal, that all is fair in love and baseball, especially when it comes to the Cubs versus the White Sox.

Whether the less-than-friendly confines of the White Sox home stadium had any effect on Sosa or the Cubs is a matter of debate. But Sosa did go 0 for 4 in Friday's game, striking out three times, and he was 1 for 4 today.

The White Sox have won four of the five games in this interleague series, which began last weekend at Wrigley Field.

Sosa's first at-bat was met with a chorus of boos and he was called out on strikes, though the Cubs went on to score three runs that inning. The Cubs' early lead was quickly matched by the White Sox, who also scored three runs in the first inning.

By the end of the third, the Sox were up, 4-3, and it was clear the game would be competitive.

The home of the White Sox has changed its name, and the names and faces of the White Sox and Cub players have also changed over the years. None of that, many here say, has lessened the intensity of the rivalry among fans, even among members of the same family, who consider the matchup to be their World Series.

''We have a better pitching staff, we've got a better manager,'' said Piper, wearing a Cubs jersey. Seated next to him was his uncle, Jack Leonard, 51, a Sox loyalist, who wore the jersey to prove it.

''He's always going to be a Cubs fan,'' Leonard, a Sox season-ticket holder, said of his nephew. ''And I'm always going to be a Sox fan.''

For many years, whether people were Sox or Cubs fans boiled down to what neighborhood they lived in. Many who lived on the more middle-class North Side, the beloved land of Wrigley Field, pledged allegiance to Da Cubs. People from the grittier South Side loved the Sox. People who lived on the West Side loved either the Cubs or the Sox.

Despite the intensity of the rivalry, there was evidence that there was no harm intended by the heckling of Sosa, and that most fans, even Cubs fans, could enjoy a good chuckle, even if it was at Sosa's expense.

A White Sox fan, Mike McGinnis, 54, wore a necklace made of cork and carried a ''Just Say No'' sign that bore a picture of Osama bin Laden in a headdress with the Cubs' logo.

''Osama is a Cubs fan,'' McGinnis chanted, toting the sign above his head as he walked through the corridor of the ballpark, drawing stares and laughter from White Sox and Cubs fans alike. But not everyone was amused.

''Hey, that's disrespectful,'' said one young man, wearing a Cubs jersey, shaking his head.

It was not clear who would have the last laugh -- Cubs fans or Sox fans. A downpour in the top of the seventh sent fans and players running for cover with the Cubs up, 6-4.

The game resumed after a 36-minute rain delay, and the White Sox, after Rowand's homer and Jimenez's winning hit, touched off another celebration.

The final game between the teams is Sunday at U.S. Cellular Field. For Cubs fans, it means one more chance to save face, and for Sosa, one more game of ribbing in the unfriendly confines.

BASEBALL
