Rainbow flags, samba drag queens, politicians, gay grandparents and a lavish flow of discordantly thumping floats made their way down Fifth Avenue yesterday, as they do every year. But there was an added hop of jubilation this time.

The celebratory jolt at New York City's gay and lesbian pride parade drew from two significant advances in gay rights this month -- the United States Supreme Court's ruling to strike down laws against sodomy and decisions in Canada to allow same-sex marriages.

Crowds cheered louder, political groups marched in greater numbers and paradegoers seemed more party-prone than protest-bound, organizers and longtime participants said. The mood mirrored that at gay pride parades that drew hundreds of thousands of people across the country yesterday, from Atlanta to San Francisco.

''We've broken new ground,'' said Janice E. Thom, a spokeswoman for Heritage of Pride, which organized the 34th annual parade, now known as New York City's Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual, Transgender Pride March. ''It's part of the mainstreaming of us as people. We're becoming part of the diverse quilt of this country.''

The parade lasted more than five hours and flowed from Fifth Avenue at 52nd Street down to the West Village. It drew as many as 250,000 observers and participants, organizers said.

Scant protesters engaging in rosary prayer circles were upstaged by the thick, noisy crowds, which lined the length of the parade and cheered in waves, with many peering through video camera lenses.

Rainbow-hued arcs of balloons led a cacophonous succession of bouncing beach balls, shrill whistles and clashing, often-deafening musical rhythms. In keeping with past parades, veterans of the 1969 gay rights disturbances helped lead the entourage.

''This is what pride is all about,'' said Greg Curatolo, 47, of the West Village, as he held the Stonewall Veterans' Association banner awaiting his cue to march.

Paradegoers included a gay and lesbian gospel choir; the Brazilian Rainbow Group, which included a bare-skinned man wrapped in the green and yellow Brazilian flag bearing the national motto, ''Order and Progress,'' in Portuguese; a group of lesbian and gay judges; a gay rodeo group; a gay rugby team; and the Imperial Float of New York, filled with would-be princesses in tiaras, waving in slow motion to the crowd.

Humor was in constant supply. One marcher held a picket sign with a message for Supreme Court Justice Clarence Thomas that read, ''Hey, Clarence, sexual harassment is demeaning, not sodomy.''

Don Bennett and his partner, Paul Templeton, traveled to New York from Albuquerque, specifically to see the parade.

''This is very special to me,'' Mr. Templeton said. ''I grew up in rural America. You heard about gay pride for years. It makes me feel a part of that.''

Of the parade he added: ''The costumes are great and, of course, the men. I'd be lying if I don't say the men are gorgeous.''

The parade also drew its annual supply of elected officials, including Mayor Michael R. Bloomberg, United States Senator Charles E. Schumer, State Senator Thomas K. Duane, Council Speaker Gifford Miller and Councilwoman Christine C. Quinn.

Mayor Bloomberg, who has been lustily booed at several recent parades, received a warm welcome as he marched down Fifth Avenue with several gay city employees. Shouts from the crowd included: ''We love you, Mayor!'' ''Nice to see ya!'' and ''Go Bloomberg -- No. 1!''

The mayor told reporters that he thought the Supreme Court made the right ruling last week. But he side-stepped a question about whether he supports gay marriage.

''I'm sort of on record as not being in favor of marriage, period, for myself,'' he said. ''I've done one marriage, and I think I'll stay out of the marriage business. I've got other things to worry about.''

Senator Schumer proudly announced to a reporter that he was the first senator to march in this parade, in 1999, adding: ''I've been saying to people, 'Let's hear it for the Supreme Court.' Whoever thought I'd be saying that?''

Brendon Fay, a gay rights advocate and a television producer, held a sign that read ''Justice for Gay Couples.'' Mr. Fay, of Astoria, Queens, is organizing to send a group of gay couples from New York to Canada so they can be legally married.

Mr. Fay said he and his partner, Tom Moulton, will be legally married in Canada in July.

''We want equal justice here in the United States, so when we return our marriages are afforded the same legal rights,'' Mr. Fay said.

Before the parade began, dozens of couples took part in commitment ceremonies, a staple of the event.

Tempering the joy over the Supreme Court ruling, Carol Parson, 69, of Brooklyn, said she was not ready to believe that it means a permanent victory for gays.

''It's a long time coming,'' said Ms. Parson, a retired nurse who marched with Senior Action in a Gay Environment. ''We've been fighting for equal rights in the city forever, it seems. I've personally seen too much come and go not to be a little subdued about what's happening. I'm waiting for the backlash.''
