A few things were clear, even before the first bat cracked today at U.S. Cellular Field in the finale of this year's interleague matchup between the Cubs and the White Sox: the battle for bragging rights was already over; the merciless derision by White Sox fans aimed at Sammy Sosa because of his use of a corked bat was not over; and, at least for now, the Sox were hot and the Cubs were not.

The Cubs fell victim to an end-of-June swoon, in part because of their American League hometown rivals. But in the end, they prevented a sweep of the weekend series by the White Sox with a 5-2 victory today.

Sosa praised the performance of Cubs starting pitcher Kerry Wood, who allowed only four hits and two runs over eight innings. ''I always say that a good pitch can stop a good hitter,'' Sosa said. ''And you see that today.''

Going into today's game, the Cubs had lost four games in a row and were in third place in the National League Central Division, behind St. Louis and Houston. The White Sox had won four of their last five and were in third place in the American League Central, behind Kansas City and Minnesota.

The White Sox won four of the six games in this year's matchup with the Cubs. They scored the winning runs in the bottom of the ninth inning in Friday's and Saturday's games.

After today's game, White Sox Manager Jerry Manuel said he hoped his team's recent good play would be a ''springboard for us to continue to play solid.''

Cubs Manager Dusty Baker said he was glad to have the hometown series behind him. ''We get back to our league,'' he said. ''They beat us this year in the series, and we played good baseball. They nipped us at the wire a couple of times.''

Baker was also glad his team ended its losing streak. ''Anytime you lose four in a row, it's big,'' he said. ''You want to stop the bleeding. And one thing that we discussed in spring training is that with our pitching, we shouldn't go into any long spiraling losing streaks. Kerry came out today ready and threw the ball great. That was a real gutsy performance.''

Earlier today, White Sox fans were hoping for a sweep. ''Being a Sox fan, I want to see them annihilate them,'' said Marc Miller, 29, who was having a tailgate party before the game with his wife, Becky, and their friends Cyndi and Jay Ruckert. Other White Sox fans seemed to agree. The jeering of Sosa continued, with the stadium erupting in a wave of boos and chants of ''Corky'' whenever he stepped to the plate.

The Cubs took the lead, 3-1, in the fourth inning. Sosa singled before Moises Alou hit a two-run homer, and they added a run on a single by Tom Goodwin. The Cubs tacked on a run in the fifth and finished their scoring in the sixth, with a homer by Jose Hernandez. Attendance at today's game was 44,858, the ninth largest for a regular-season game at U.S. Cellular Field.

Flavio Delgado, 28, a White Sox fan, and his friends, some of them Cubs loyalists, arrived about an hour before the game for their tailgate party in a parking lot. There they lounged in chairs at the back of an open Dodge Caravan.

''I look forward to sweeps,'' Delgado said as he held a cheeseburger in one hand and a beer in the other. ''The Cubs' fans are always talking all this mess that 'We've always got a full house,' but it doesn't matter.''

Delgado's friend Gil Cruz, 32, who braved the White Sox crowd by wearing a Sosa jersey, said, ''The only time you guys got a full house is when we're here.''

Delgado conceded that point but was quick to point out that the White Sox, at least this season, have bragging rights. ''It's fun to rub it in when you get the win,'' he said.

Frank Lopez, another of Delgado's friends and a White Sox fan, said that all the jeering aimed at Sosa seemed to have grown a little stale.

''It's getting pretty old,'' said Lopez, 30. ''We need to find some new clichés.''

BASEBALL
