Last August, sales of Metabolife International's ephedra weight-loss product plummeted after the company revealed to the Food and Drug Administration almost 15,000 ''adverse events'' experienced by its ephedra users since May 1997.

In a memorandum, a company executive talked about how to head off any further decline in sales: by keeping the product on the shelves, even though Metabolife was preparing an ephedra-free version. There was no sense, the reasoning went, in creating the impression that Metabolife doubted its product by rushing out a replacement. Retailers might pull the item, called Metabolife 356, and the company -- the country's largest seller of ephedra products -- might then collapse, an executive wrote.

That memorandum was released yesterday by a Congressional committee that will convene hearings on Wednesday on the ephedra industry. ''Publicly, Metabolife talks a lot about safety,'' said Ken Johnson, spokesman for the committee. ''But privately, the operative word seems to be sales.''

Mr. Johnson said legislators were ''deeply concerned that consumers are not getting all of the facts they need to make informed decisions.''

Metabolife has consistently maintained that its products are safe when used as directed.

Representative Billy Tauzin, the Louisiana Republican who is chairman of the House Committee on Energy and Commerce, and Representative James C. Greenwood, the Pennsylvania Republican who heads its investigations subcommittee, are planning two days of hearings.

The committee has subpoenaed David Brown, who recently stepped down as Metabolife's president; Michael Ellis, the company's founder; and Daniel Rodriguez, a current employee who works with the group that fields complaints and inquiries from consumers, Mr. Johnson said. All refused invitations.

''They will be given every opportunity to come and tell their side of the story,'' Mr. Johnson said. ''If they choose to take the Fifth, that is their constitutional right. But no one is getting a free pass from this committee.''

The panel has gathered thousands of documents, Mr. Johnson said, and is scheduled to hear testimony from dozens of witnesses, including two teams of scientists.

A debate rages over whether ephedra has been scientifically proven safe or not. Under a 1994 law, the Food and Drug Administration cannot take action to regulate a dietary supplement unless there is substantial evidence of its danger.

Jan Strode, a Metabolife spokesman, declined to comment on the subpoenas but said that company representatives would appear before the committee.

Metabolife's current chief executive, Russell Schreck, who took over from Mr. Brown last month, is set to appear voluntarily, Mr. Johnson said. But he added that the committee especially wanted to hear from officials who worked at the company before it revealed evidence of negative reactions to ephedra.

After years of denying that they had received any reports of problems from customers, Metabolife provided the Food and Drug Administration last August with thousands of such reports. It did so soon after the Justice Department began a criminal investigation to determine whether Metabolife executives had lied about what they knew.

Sales dropped immediately after the reports were handed over, according to the memorandum.

''Accounts believe if 356 gets pulled it will bankrupt the company,'' Eric Larsen, vice president for sales and marketing, wrote in the memorandum to Mr. Brown. ''The other issue is that we don't know how much we could be scaring the consumer by having it changed out so quickly.''

Ms. Strode said the memorandum was simply a sales report. ''Metabolife stayed the course of its marketing plan and put an ephedra-free product with clinically proven ingredients on the market in December 2002,'' she said. ''We stand by the fact that we believe our current products are safe and effective when used as directed.''
