TO the residents of Fenwick, the section of Old Saybrook where Katharine Hepburn lived, the actress's nine-bedroom mansion facing the Long Island Sound was just called ''Kate's house,'' while the parcel of property to the east of her driveway was just a marshy plot filled with invasive grasses and some dunes.

But after Miss Hepburn's death in June, and the submission of her will to the local probate court last week, the four-acre-plus piece of property, determined by officials to be ''unbuildable,'' has gained as much recognition as the rambling, rustic mansion itself.

In Miss Hepburn's will, the actress left the house and the bulk of her estate to her siblings and their families. Some furniture and paintings were given to the ABC news correspondent Cynthia McFadden, a friend of Hepburn's who was named a co-executor of the will, and sums of money were given to friends and employees.

The 4.17 acre plot known as the ''east lot'' was left, the will states, for ''exclusively public purposes'' to be determined by the executors. But so far, ''exclusively public purposes'' has caused some confusion, and, aside from the general frenzy of interest in the actress's will, has triggered a barrage of media inquiries about Miss Hepburn's intentions. Did she want it turned into a public park, for all to use?

The answer is a very probable no.

''What the public's interest is and who will take control of the property is yet to be determined,'' said Michael A. Pace, the first selectman of Old Saybrook, adding, ''I don't think it will be a public park. I would lean more toward open space.''

Miss Hepburn took an active role in securing land in Old Saybrook for public use and open space, Mr. Pace stressed, and gave money to buying land in town. (She also donated a fire truck that fireman nicknamed ''Miss Kate,'' which was put out of service two years ago.)

''She grew up down in Fenwick,'' Mr. Pace added. ''This has been her home, and she fully understood the impact on the Sound because her house was on the water. I think this is her environmental justice piece, if you will.''

Fenwick is actually a borough within Old Saybrook. It is a separate entity with its own governing Board of Warden and Burgesses. And while it is politically distinct -- Miss Hepburn's will begins, ''I, Katharine Hepburn, of Fenwick, Connecticut,'' for example -- the town also has a distinct character.

Set off from most of Old Saybrook by a causeway and looking more like Nantucket than Connecticut with its cedar-shingled beach homes, it was a place where Miss Hepburn could get the privacy she fiercely wanted. Residents in Fenwick were so cautious not to disturb her that as children, some residents remember being told by their parents not to say hello if they saw her walking along the road.

''We respected her privacy all these years,'' said Robert Boody, whose family owns a home in Fenwick, ''and she was very respectful of the community.''

The community in Fenwick is so interwoven that when one family decides to sell a home, they send a letter to all Fenwick residents to let them know, so they can have a chance to bid first. ''It's a custom,'' said Ethel Davis, who lives in Fenwick and grew up visiting her grandparents there.

Ms. Davis, whose terrace faces the back of the Hepburn house, is president of the Lynde Point Land Trust, an organization formed by Fenwick residents in the early 1990's to help preserve open space in the borough. Ms. Davis said she has had some very positive conversations about the property with another co-executor, Erik Hanson, a friend and financial consultant of Miss Hepburn's.

''I guess I can say we're very hopeful about getting the land,'' Ms. Davis said. ''We've been led to feel we have a good chance.''

But, Ms. Davis noted, the executors could decide to give the land to another conservation group or to the borough.

In the meantime the house, which sits on a separate three-acre plot, will go on the market. The town assessor's office has valued the somewhat dilapidated mansion at $1.362 million (or just under $2 million in full market value), but residents, who want to preserve the plot as open space, fear it will go for a lot more.

''We're hoping a group will get together and buy the house,'' said Mr. Boody. ''We're hoping it can be salvaged, but if not, we'll just leave it as open space. I think that's what she was leaning toward.''

That might not be so easy, though. The land the house sits on is not just a prime lot on the Sound; it can probably be divided into two building lots, driving up the price even more and putting it beyond the financial reach of local residents.

So now they simply have to wait. ''I would love to see a way, personally and wearing my land trust hat, that there would be only one house there, not two McMansions,'' Ms. Davis said. ''Katharine Hepburn and her family obviously appreciated the wildness here. They were eccentric and free-spirited. She would've wanted it to stay that way.''
