THE definition of a clam: any of numerous edible marine bivalve mollusks living in sand or mud.

But the definition of a clam shack, the humble culinary home of the clam? Well, that's not as easy to distill into a few words.

A clam shack is a state of mind.

Clam shacks are icons of the summertime Connecticut landscape, and while their characteristics vary from place to place, they are all classic New England.

''If you're talking to someone from Indiana, they won't know what a clam shack is,'' said David Blaney, owner of Sea Swirl, a clam shack housed in an old Carvel ice cream building on Route 1 in Mystic. ''But New Englanders understand.''

It's not clear exactly how many restaurants in Connecticut define themselves as clam shacks because there are no regulatory designations that distinguish clam shacks from other types of restaurants. What is clear, people say, is that they wish there were more of them.

''What I'm getting from the general population is there aren't enough of these things,'' said George Arena, owner of the Clam Castle, a squat, yellow clam shack decorated with hand-painted smiling clams in Madison.

Generally speaking, clam shacks have a counter where you order the food and a window where it is picked up when someone barks your number over a rudimentary public address system, sometimes a hand-held megaphone. Clam shacks are usually free-standing, roadside structures with small kitchens that pump out seafood, much of it deep fried, with accompaniments of fried side dishes. They are often seasonal, family owned places where customers sit outside at picnic tables, eating food from plastic baskets and, since most clam shacks are BYOB, drinking bottles of beer or wine brought from home.

''They're traditionally not fancy, and oftentimes they're in an old structure,'' Mr. Blaney said. ''Oftentimes they're on the water, and oftentimes they're on Route 1.''

Indeed, what Broadway is to theaters, the Boston Post Road, or Route 1, is to clam shacks, and from Branford to the Rhode Island line anyone driving along the road will stumble along one eventually.

Clam shacks often claim to be ''famous'' for something: fried whole belly clams, clam rolls, lobster rolls, or chowder. And they often have slogans. Johnny Ad's, a clam shack in Old Saybrook, even has two: ''The Clam Shack With Style'' and ''The Little Seafood Restaurant With the Big Ocean Taste.''

And, of course, there are the clams.

''A clam shack should have a top-notch clam; that's a true clam shack,'' said Deidre Mears, whose family owns Abbott's Lobster in the Rough and Costello's Clam Shack, both in Noank. ''When I think of clam shacks, I think I should get the best clam I can get.''

Usually a clam shack is defined by how well it fries its clams, though not always. At the Place, a near legendary ''in the rough'' restaurant in Guilford where people sit outside on tree stumps, clams are roasted and served on steel grates.

''In the high season we can go through maybe 14, 15 bags a week if it doesn't rain,'' said Vaughn Knowles, the co-owner, explaining that there are 400 clams to a bag. (The math, by the way, adds up to 6,000 clams on a good week.)

Conveniently, Connecticut has clams to spare.

''Connecticut is the leading producer on the East Coast,'' said Inke Sunila, a shellfish pathologist with the Bureau of Aquaculture in the State Department of Agriculture, who noted that Connecticut's production of clams has gone up from 54,000 bushels in 1982, to 146,000 in 1992, to 290,000 last year, and is now a $10 million industry with most of the state's clams going to New York and Boston. ''We use hydraulic clam dredges with jet streams of water. We have clams along the whole shoreline.''

The Connecticut clam -- Mercenaria mercenaria -- is known as a quahog throughout New England, but a hard clam farther south. (The Latin root of the taxonomic name actually means ''paid'' or ''hired'' and, perhaps, could be the origin of the slang substitution of clams for money.) And though clam eaters swear there is a difference from one region's clams to another -- and some can even distinguish between clams from different producers within the Long Island Sound -- the species is the same from here to Maine.

''Consumers say they taste different depending on where they're from,'' Ms. Sunila said, ''but you have to be a real connoisseur to pick up the difference, like a wine connoisseur.''

The clams used in fried clam rolls or clam strips are actually a soft-shell ''steamer'' clam, said Bill Moore, a buyer for the Connecticut Shellfish Company, a shellfish wholesaler.

Steamers, Mr. Moore said, are not widely commercially produced in Connecticut. For quahogs, however, Mr. Moore said, some Connecticut restaurateurs actually prefer clams from Rhode Island.

''They'll tell me they want Rhode Island clams instead of Connecticut clams because of the half shell,'' he said. ''The half shell in the Connecticut clam is more brittle and makes it hard to open. But then some people want Connecticut clams because a Connecticut clam coming in my door is a day to two days fresher than a Rhode Island clam. It goes both ways.''

Anecdotally, clam shack owners and aficionados said that the demand for clam shacks had gone up, a phenomenon, they said, was due to a number of factors.

''There's a real allure to being able to bring your own bottle of wine, bring your own tablecloth and set yourself up for the night,'' Ms. Mears said. ''It's an attraction. And especially these days, it's comfort food. It's what I grew up with.'' And she added, ''People are staying closer to home these days.''

Tradition is also a big part of the draw.

''I think that even though they're simple, humble, modest places, they are living American history,'' said Brooke Dojny, the author of ''The New England Clam Shack Cookbook,'' published this year. ''They link our past with our present.''

Ms. Dojny explained that clam shacks began to spring up in the 1920's when cars brought more people onto New England's growing system of roads for weekend drives. Also helping was the perfection of a ''good, reliable'' deep fryer, Ms. Dojny said, as well as refrigeration and sliced bread. The clam shack, for all its nostalgic associations, is actually a product of modern invention.

Now, though, the various difficulties of running a clam shack are putting the squeeze on a New England tradition.

Jim Farrell, vice president of operations for the Connecticut Restaurant Association, said opening clam shacks isn't a popular move for restaurateurs. ''They're difficult to run,'' he said, ''because you only have five months, max, to make your money.''

Mr. Farrell noted that real estate pressures and the rising value of property on the shoreline could be putting some clam shacks out of business. ''I'm seeing them start to move inland,'' he said.

Weather is also a tricky variable in the calculus of running a clam shack, many in the business said, and this season, with a rainy, cold start to summer, has been especially tough.

''It's only in the last two weeks that people have been acting like it's summer,'' said Mr. Knowles of the Place a few weeks ago. ''This year, we're having the worst season so far - ever.''

Another difficulty is the seafood itself. ''I think it's the hardest restaurant to run,'' said Mr. Arena of the Clam Castle. ''The fish needs to be fresh. The oil needs to be fresh. You can't compromise with fish. You lose your fish after two days.'' Hamburgers and hotdogs, Mr. Arena explained, are more forgiving.

When you add up all the challenges, Connecticut has become difficult terrain for clam shacks.

''I found that a lot had closed and were not being replaced because they were under pressure from real estate and because they're seasonal,'' Ms. Dojny said, referring to New England clam shacks in general. ''That's one reason I wrote the book, because I think they're in danger of disappearing. But paradoxically, they're more popular than ever, and people like the tradition, especially New Englanders.''

So, there's hope.

In Noank, the Mears family, which had run Abbott's Lobster in the Rough since 1980, opened up Costello's Clam Shack six years ago. ''It was because we saw a great demand for customers coming up to our window at Abbot's and asking for fried clams,'' Ms. Mears said. ''It just seemed like a perfect fit.''

In the Niantic section of East Lyme, a brand new clam shack, Skipper's, opened this year. ''I saw the opportunity,'' said Lefty Tsiropoulos, the owner of Skipper's, who moved to East Lyme from Stamford to open Skipper's.

Skipper's, in fact, is so young it doesn't even have it's own clam shack-esque slogan yet. ''I wanted to wait for the slogan,'' Mr. Tsiropoulos said, ''to see what develops.''

And the old, established clam shacks are likely to stay put, too - at least for a while.

''We were offered money from a major drug store chain for our property and we said 'Go take a hike,''' Mr. Knowles said. ''We have people who want us to be here and we want to be here. We expect to be cranking along for the next 20 years.''

Connecticut
