THE rumor going around Irvington, Va., last spring was all about Martha Stewart, who was supposed to be inches away from buying a farm outside town. These days she's probably more interested in legal architecture.

Still it's hard to argue with the logic behind the gossip: social rehabilitation through real estate is a time-honored tradition, especially on the Northern Neck, a peninsula that juts into the Chesapeake Bay between the Potomac and Rappahannock Rivers. It may be a quiet rural backwater, but people there have been gossiping about the rising and falling fortunes of landowners since the early 18th century, when the Carters and the Lees and the Washingtons presided over their own little empires.

Of course, you needn't be a local to engage in such a satisfying sport. In fact, all that's necessary is to turn south at the Texaco station in the two-block stretch that passes for downtown Irvington, follow King Carter Drive and enter the gates of the Tides Inn, where anyone with a functioning credit card can book a room and assess the results of another kind of rehabilitation: this dowager hotel's multimillion-dollar face lift.

The Tides isn't one of those resorts that knock you out with stunning architecture. Instead, it seduces you with its setting: the main buildings, plain white with weathered red roofs, seem modest when approached from the land, but they loom large when seen from the water -- and it's the water that matters.

Cut into two sides of a bluff that pokes into Carter's Creek, the hotel is tethered to the land by dogwoods and azaleas and cleverly terraced gardens, but the creek provides the best scenery -- and the best reminder that this is a place where boating rivals golfing for serious leisure attention. The 18-hole golf course is a five-minute drive away and the par-3 course does double duty as landscaping along the entrance drive. Inside the inn, however, most of the public and private rooms face the creek. It's like a ship that never leaves its mooring.

In mid-April, when my husband, John, and I arrived for a three-night stay, the weather was too cool to make boating or swimming very tempting, but enjoying the view in the off-season quiet was more than enough compensation. Driven indoors by the summer heat, we might have found our double room in the four-story Garden House, alongside the main building, a bit cramped.

In the springtime, though, we took advantage of a wall of floor-to-ceiling glass doors that opened onto a large brick terrace and a lawn running down to an almost-empty pier. Fortified with wine and sweaters, we had the midweek sunset all to ourselves.

The rooms and suites on the opposite side of the bluff, in Windsor House and Lancaster House, are more secluded, with balconies above another bend in the creek, but even a small room like ours was efficiently and luxuriously organized. Louvered inner doors, of dark wood, protected our privacy, and the décor -- bedspread, carpet and curtains in shades of green, beige and pink, and plantation-style furniture -- was stylishly subdued. Around the corner, a reproduction highboy and a spacious closet faced a brown marble sink framed in dark wood paneling, with the rest of the bathroom a step away, behind another door.

The housekeepers were vigilant about keeping us stocked with dogwood bath gel, azalea shampoo, geranium and elderflower conditioner and fancy soaps. And after the bed was turned down on our first night, we found two bottles of Carver's Original Ginger Ale (''a Virginia tradition since 1926'') on the counter.

Maybe it's the influence of the new owners, Sedona Resorts (which also operates the Enchantment Resort in Arizona), but the small, elegant lobby of the Tides, with its glass doors leading to another brick terrace, had an unexpectedly chic feel. In contrast, the adjacent ''view room,'' full of well-upholstered sofas and armchairs, seemed more like the airy New England hotel lounges of my childhood.

Out on the grounds, a croquet court is slotted into the hillside near a tiny sand beach, while a fitness center and tennis courts lie farther inland. At the dock (whose transient slips are popular with boaters following the Intracoastal Waterway), a suitably grand atmosphere is established by the inn's two motor yachts, the 60-foot High Tide and the 127-foot Miss Ann. The latter was built in 1926 for a Detroit industrialist whose wife got caught in a storm on the yacht's maiden voyage -- and swore off anything nautical for the rest of her life. These days the Miss Ann is the pampered lady, taking guests on luncheon and cocktail cruises, as well as a temptingly named Whiskey Run to Urbanna (an old tobacco port up the Rappahannock River) on Saturdays.

The hotel's $8-a-room daily resort fee includes most of these cruises, as well as the use of bicycles and canoes, the par-3 course, tennis, swimming and croquet. In the summer high season (a term that seems appropriate for a place that requires jackets at dinner and frowns on tank tops and cutoffs just about any time), there's also a sailing school, half- or full-day programs for children 4 to 12, and tennis and golf lessons.

JOHN opted for a morning round at the Golden Eagle ($70 for the golf and $15 for the mandatory cart), a 6,500-yard, par-72 course built around a 40-acre lake (stocked with fish and, presumably, golf balls) called ''the toughest golf course that no one has ever heard of'' by Golf Digest magazine. Afterward, I retrieved his scorecard from the wastebasket (86 isn't anything to be ashamed of) and solicited his assessment: a good test, a nice-looking course.

Then he changed the subject by observing that my morning activity -- a very soothing facial at the inn's full-service spa -- had cost more than his golf ($100 plus tip). Well, some things in life just aren't fair. And to prove it, I dropped more cash downtown, at two shops that must cater to the well-heeled retirees who are said to be flocking to the area.

One of them was a docent at Christ Church, a mid-18th-century landmark in a peaceful grove on the outskirts of Irvington. An hour's drive northwest in Stratford, and well worth the journey, is Stratford Hall, a distinctive H-shaped brick manor house built in the 1730's that was home to Richard Henry and Francis Lightfoot Lee, the only brothers to sign the Declaration of Independence, and their kinsman, Robert E. Lee. Stratford -- on 1,700 acres of farmland and gardens, complete with a reconstruction of a 250-year-old grist mill -- would be impressive even without historic associations.

The airy, high-ceilinged Great Hall is a particularly fine example of Georgian design, and the whole place provides a nice contrast to the more modest homestead just down the road from Stratford Hall at Pope's Creek Plantation, the birthplace of George Washington. There, the Memorial Mansion (a replica of a typical 18th-century gentleman's dwelling, built before the foundation of the original house erected by Washington's father was rediscovered) is as cozy as Stratford is grand. Pope's Creek, designed to acquaint visitors with the seasonal activities of a colonial-era tobacco plantation, is run as a living history museum by the National Park Service.

My husband's idea of living history begins with his stomach: he's a connoisseur of that endangered institution, the small-town nonfranchise coffee shop, especially at breakfast time. We didn't find any stand-out coffee shops, but I'd be willing to bet that the Sunday brunch at Irvington's one and only bistro, the Trick Dog Café, would tempt even a purist like John, who insists that breakfast, lunch and dinner are the sole legitimate meals. Certainly, the dinner we had there -- featuring chicken tajine, a portobello and goat cheese timbale, Tunisian lamb, crab cakes on black bean cakes and bread pudding with butter rum sauce -- was the best meal of our trip.

Although the service at the Tides was impeccable -- friendly but not intrusive, always attentive -- the food was uneven. Surprisingly, the $9 room-service Continental breakfast (usually a euphemism for overpriced and undernourished) was too big to finish: a plate of mixed fruit, a thermos of coffee, a hefty glass of fresh-squeezed orange juice, two muffins, a biscuit, a glazed cinnamon roll and five pots of jam.

For different reasons, a quick evening visit to the Chesapeake Club, the inn's informal restaurant, made us wish we'd ordered less: the Caesar salad was fine, but the artichoke, spinach and crab fondue was lukewarm and bland, and half a dozen heavily breaded chicken fingers were so huge they must have come from the King Kong of fowl. (And the cloyingly sweet honey dip didn't make them seem any less leaden.)

What we ate another night in the formal dining room was much more successful: a green salad with sun-dried cranberries, spiced pecans and crumbled goat cheese; maple-glazed chicken with fried okra and black-eyed peas; a creditable pecan pie. Cap'n B's, the cheerful tin-ceilinged restaurant at the golf club, provided a passable club sandwich and a weirdly named but unexpectedly good fried chicken salad.

It could be that the less than stellar food was a result of a kitchen still gearing up. Or maybe another force was at work. This possibility arose when I was cruising the Tides Web site and came across the recipe for Sautéed Northern Neck Crab Cakes -- and discovered that the ingredient we'd failed to identify when we ordered them in the bar was that WASP staple, the Ritz cracker, mashed up and used instead of bread crumbs. Maybe it's a good thing Martha won't be settling in the neighborhood anytime soon.

If you go

The Tides Inn, 480 King Carter Drive, Irvington, Va. 22480; (800) 843-3746, fax (804) 438-5222, www .tidesinn.com, is an hour's drive from the Richmond airport and a two-anda- half-hour drive from Washington. It has 106 rooms and suites, 4 restaurants (one seasonal), 3 swimming pools, a 9-hole par-3 golf course, an 18-hole championship golf course, croquet, 4 tennis courts, a fitness center and a spa. It also has 60 deepwater slips accommodating yachts up to 125 feet. It is closed in January, February and the first half of March.

Rates for double rooms range from $199 to $325; vista suites from $399 to $495; deluxe suites from $450 to $850. The inn is closed in January, February and the first half of March.

ALIDA BECKER is an editor at The New York Times Book Review.
