The shots sounded moments after Janard Knight left a basketball game in Canarsie, Brooklyn, to look for a bottle of water on Sunday night.

''I started running,'' Mr. Knight, 16, said yesterday. ''I felt two shots go into the back of my legs. I kept running until I got to a newsstand.''

There, Mr. Knight pulled up his shorts and showed a vendor the blood. Then he sat on an overturned garbage can and waited for an ambulance to arrive. A bullet had gone through each of his legs, leaving holes that gushed blood.

Mr. Knight was among six people shot -- none fatally -- by a man after a fight during the basketball game, the police said. Yesterday, officers combed the neighborhood, searching for clues about the shooting, and put up posters with a photograph of the suspect, Tony Lopez, offering a $2,000 reward for information leading to his arrest.

Mr. Knight lay sedated at Brookdale University Hospital and Medical Center, several feet away from a friend, a 14-year-old boy who was also among the victims. The 14-year-old's family asked that his name not be released for fear of retaliation.

Neither of the teenagers said they knew the gunman or what happened before the shooting. They appeared to have been caught up in gunfire directed at others.

The other victims were: Rakim Walker, 16, who was shot in the leg; Derrick Washington, 17, shot in the hip; Richard Foster, 32, shot in the thigh; and Steven Hall, 22, who was shot in the hand. All were hospitalized Sunday night, and Mr. Hall was released yesterday.

The basketball game was part of an all-day tournament at Canarsie Beach Park between teams representing housing developments in the area, Mr. Knight said. The team from the Breukelen houses -- where Mr. Knight and the 14-year-old victim live -- had been playing around 8 p.m. when the fight broke out.

The police would not release details about the fight, but said the girlfriend of one man may have made a comment, possibly to one of the players, that led to the dispute. Some of the victims began beating the man, the police said.

The police believe the man then left, got a 9-millimeter handgun and returned on a bicycle to Rockaway Parkway and Avenue N, a few blocks from the basketball court. It is not clear what happened next, but the police said the man opened fire in the street, hitting at least some of the men who had fought with him.

Caprice Clark, 15, and her friend Sekeana Jones, 16, were sitting on the stoop of Miss Clark's house on Avenue N when the shooting began.

''He stopped in front of our gate and shot after them,'' Miss Jones said. ''We saw the sparks come out of the gun. That's when we got inside and on the floor and called the cops.''

Yesterday, a police van drove slowly through the neighborhood, flashing its lights and blaring, through a loudspeaker: ''You will remain anonymous. There's a reward for up to $2,000.''

The police described the suspect, Mr. Lopez, 18, as 5-foot-8 and 190 pounds.

The 14-year-old victim had been heading home from the game with his 20-year-old brother when they heard shots.

''I was walking home, and I heard the shots and I started running,'' the younger boy said in slow whispers.

The 20-year-old, who also asked not to be named for fear of retaliation, said he called out for his little brother, but lost sight of him.

''It was really frustrating because I couldn't get to him,'' he said. ''We were ducking the shots and everything. It was really crazy.''

The younger boy was hit by a bullet that traveled through his right thigh, and was told by doctors not to move his leg for eight hours or he could lose it, said his cousin Stephanie Ballinger, 35.

Jeanette Roberts, 44, was cooking dinner in her apartment when neighbors called up to her window, saying her son Janard Knight had been shot.

''The nervousness I felt when my son was shot walking home from an innocent game,'' said Ms. Roberts, who rushed to the scene in a friend's car. ''I didn't know what to think. Thank God it wasn't worse.''

Ms. Roberts called her son's father, Tony Knight, from the hospital.

''Kids should be able to go to a game, enjoy themselves and come home without getting shot,'' said Mr. Knight, 43. Janard is his only child.

''That's why people are moving out of New York,'' he said. ''Their kids aren't safe in a school, in a playground, not anywhere. The parents are not teaching these kids respect.''
