In the back of a small shop in Queens, hundreds of packages are stacked to the ceiling. They hold a feast of fragile things: freshly-baked bread, homemade candy, and in one plastic bag, Florencio Sosa's favorite mole sauce, cooked by his mother-in-law 48 hours earlier in a tiny village 2,200 miles away.

''There's nothing like the flavor of a mother's cooking,'' said Mr. Sosa, 31, a factory worker who left Mexico for New York in 1990 and never returned. ''It's a way of going back.''

Week after week, the packages make their way from Puebla, Mexico, to Tulcingo Travel in Jackson Heights, part of a thriving underground of cross-border couriers who fly back and forth between the New York area and Latin America, transporting the sorely missed pleasures of home to the city's immigrants with an immediacy that is changing their way of life.

The service is simple: Mr. Sosa calls his mother-in-law, orders some mole and she drops her chocolate-flavored chili sauce at a satellite office in her town, Huamuxtitlán. One or two men pick up the package and hundreds more and stuff them into suitcases. Some are shipped on cargo planes and others travel with the couriers aboard commercial flights.

United States customs officials began noticing the couriers two years ago at Kennedy and Newark Liberty International Airports and now see them daily, coming off flights from Ecuador, Costa Rica, Colombia, Mexico and other Latin American countries.

''Those are a headache for us,'' said a laughing Robert Redes, director of cargo operations for agriculture inspection with United States Customs and Border Protection at Kennedy Airport. ''It's almost like Christmas, where we have to open up every one of these things to see what we have.''

The operation is legal, Mr. Redes said, as long as the packages inside contain no meat or fresh produce.

Known in Spanish as paqueterías, the courier services tap into the nostalgia market, filling an aching void between New York's poorer immigrants, many not legal residents, and the people they left behind. Often faster, cheaper and more connected to the remote corners of Latin America than larger shipping companies like Federal Express, the services sustain a transnational culture unthinkable to the waves of immigrants who braved the move to New York even 20 years ago.

Tucked in plastic bags and Tupperware containers, an array of things -- legal and illegal -- cross the border every day: cooked guinea pigs (an Ecuadorean delicacy), videotapes of missed baptisms and weddings, goats baked in cactus leaves, bundles of ripe chili peppers, letters sent by those impatient with the pace of regular mail and tall stacks of totopos, 10- to 15-inch-wide tortillas.

''When I finish them, I make a call and they send me more,'' Luis Pavia, 35, of Manhattan, said with a shrug as he tore open his 10-pound bag of totopos -- sent by his mother in Zapotitlán, Mexico -- and broke off a piece to chew while paying the $45 fee at Tulcingo Travel. Also in his package: Triatop, an anti-dandruff shampoo. ''The shampoo here is bad for me,'' he explained.

The shipments exchange the best of both worlds. From the United States, people send home packages of sneakers, televisions, CD players and other comforts that are luxuries to many in Latin America.

Back to the United States come less expensive things deemed equally priceless by the recipients.

For example, in New York, a city that is now home to a reported 300,000 Mexicans, Mr. Sosa could have walked a block from the small house he shares with nine relatives to buy mole sauce from a Mexican grocer. When asked why he shells out roughly $25 of his $350 weekly salary for packages from Mexico when he could make or buy the food here, he replies with the words echoed by many others: ''No es lo mismo.'' -- ''It's not the same.''

The difference is felt or tasted in everything from the flavor of certain dishes, to the way they are made by grocers here versus mothers at home, to less obvious oddities.

''The guinea pigs here are different,'' said Jose Ludizaca, owner of Ecuatoriana Multi Business Service in Hackensack and Trenton, N.J., which ships packages to and from Ecuador and Colombia. ''They are raised on grass in Ecuador. Here they taste different.'' (Cooked guinea pigs are allowed through customs.)

Though Mexican bakeries abound in New York, the well-traversed packages of pan dulce (sweet bread) continue to filter in.

''Here there's bread you can buy for 50 cents,'' said Carmelo Maceda, 45, a Mexican immigrant advocate in Manhattan who asks his brother in Tulcingo to send him bread from time to time. ''The one from my town can cost me $8, but it's made from my town.''

The owner of a Mexican bakery in Queens, Gerardo Torres, shakes his head at the feat of pleasing Mexicans with one kind of bread. ''These are very complicated customs we are talking about,'' said Mr. Torres, who makes bread in the style of his hometown, Cholula. ''Some people use more cinnamon, others use more orange.''

For Mr. Sosa, it is not about tasting the right combination of ingredients in his beloved mole so much as ''tasting home,'' as he puts it. His immigrant-to-homeland exchange is made possible only by cheaper telephone rates, expanded air routes and classic immigrant entrepreneurship.

The owners of paqueterías in the New York area tend to be from the countries the businesses serve.

Juan Luna, a Mexican immigrant, opened Tulcingo Travel on Roosevelt Avenue in 1996 after he saw a growing need for a package service between Puebla State and New York. His couriers deliver the packages to five offices in the Puebla region, and sometimes directly to a person's home, with the help of his brother, who manages the business from Mexico.

Such direct access is not often the forte of larger shipping companies. For example, if someone wanted to send a 20-pound package of clothes to Huamuxtitlán, with Federal Express, the recipient would have to travel roughly 125 miles to retrieve it, at the nearest office in Acapulco. It would cost the sender $125.36 (not including taxes or duties), compared to $90 at Tulcingo Travel (which also pays taxes and duties) and would take three days to arrive, said Pam Roberson, a spokeswoman for Federal Express.

''It's the transnationalization of local life,'' said Robert C. Smith, a sociologist at Barnard College who has extensively studied New York's Mexican population. ''They're quite able to maintain certain kinds of links despite the fact that they are 2,500 miles apart, because of technology. Time and space don't define our social lives in the way they did before.''

The packages strive to feed fading memories, and bridge generational gaps. ''This you can't make here,'' smiled Silvia Anzures, 30, and originally of Puebla state, as she pointed to her newly arrived plastic packages -- which cost $10 each -- filled with candies reminiscent of peanut brittle. ''I don't even know how you make it.''

There have been a few paqueterías in New York for decades, but the number increased in the last five to 10 years, with Mexican packaging services as the latest addition. While they generally charge less than more established shipping services, the costs can be steep for families that earn little. Tulcingo Travel, for example, charges $4.50 per pound for packages sent to Mexico ($5.50 if they include electronics), and $3.00 per pound for packages sent from Mexico to the United States.

Business is flowing: every week, the company, which also has offices in Staten Island and Brooklyn, sends two 500-pound shipments of packages to Mexico, and brings back a shipment weighing an average of 6,000 pounds, Mr. Luna said.

The company warns customers not to ship meat or produce, but sometimes such items are caught by customs officials, which leads to fines.

Cornelio Cielo, who irons clothes at a dry cleaner in Queens, does not question the wisdom of spending part of his $350-weekly salary on shipments to and from his parents in Cholula. He left the town and illegally crossed the border to the United States seven years ago, he said. He has not been back.

''I send my parents clothes and videos of what the life is like here, the trains,'' said Mr. Cielo, 22, who lives in Queens. ''I love both countries very much. Mexico, because I grew up there and love my parents. Here, because there's money and it's pretty. And there is no great hardship. Everything is good.''
