THE wooden gate is chained, the sign evident. ''No camping,'' it says at the entrance to the campground at Devil's Hopyard in East Haddam. It's a campground with no camping, a restriction that started just this summer.

The entrance, at least, has had its visitors. There is an empty bottle of Mike's Hard Cranberry Lemonade, a crushed can of Budweiser, a broken bottle of Zima and several candy wrappers tossed beneath the sign. Barbara Bloomberg, president of the Friends of Devil's Hopyard, sighed. ''They are doing what they can,'' she said of the Department of Environmental Protection employees charged with maintaining the park. ''There once was a year-round staff here. Now, there is no one.''

Fewer mowed areas, fewer toilets, fewer picnic tables, fewer lifeguards, more locked gates and more garbage: The state Parks Division, an arm of the D.E.P., has lost 39 of its 145 full-time employees in the past three years, almost one-third of its entire staff. The state has continued to acquire land, though, a move both environmentalists and officials deem essential to the preservation of open space, without allocating more staff to maintain it. During the past five years, the state has acquired more than 40,000 acres of parkland, as staffing numbers dropped. And in the latest budget, the agency said it would receive about the same amount of money as last year, between $9 million and $10 million.

''The D.E.P. has a tiny budget and a huge job,'' said Patty Pendergast, the lobbyist for the Connecticut Forest and Park Association, a nonprofit group that is older - 108 -- than the state's oldest state park, Sherwood Island in Westport, acquired in 1914. ''It's law enforcement, it's wildlife, it's clean air and water. Whenever I turn around, the D.E.P. is there. Yet it gets a tiny proportion of the money and the heaviest cuts.''

Reflections on the past - when the state staffed such parks - and worries about whether the state will opt to close many parks to the public rather than spend the money to maintain them -- is taking place at parks throughout the state, as hikers, bicyclists, dog-walkers, tourists and thousands of other visitors have noticed the changes. Two bicyclists at Millers Pond State Park in Durham said recently that the path was cleared far better there than at Hurd State Park in East Hampton, where one of them normally rides. At Hurd Park, broken tree branches litter paths where grass has grown several feet high. ''It's tick heaven,'' said one of the bicyclists, Donna Carlson of the Ivoryton section of Essex.

Millers Pond State Park has had its own share of troubles. Department of Environmental Protection workers removed the park's Dumpster early this summer to save money. On the Fourth of July weekend, park visitors still threw their trash away there, even without the Dumpster. The hill of garbage provoked complaints to the agency. Signs posted in the parking lot plead with visitors, ''Please carry out what you carry in.'' That sign is necessary now, because there is no longer anyone at the agency who has the time to do it for them.

Twelve parks long maintained by staffers have now been designated as ''walk-in parks,'' which means gates locked to cars, no picnic tables and limited maintenance. In the heat of this summer, those accustomed to driving to picnic areas and swimming holes have had to walk the distance. The state also is allowing 50 other state parks to become ''natural areas.'' Picnic tables, staff, drinking water and trash pickup are being reduced. Bathrooms are being closed.

''It's very frustrating to the park staff, who are dedicated and who have done an amazing job keeping the cutbacks out of the eye of the visitor,'' said Diana McMasters, president of the Friends of Connecticut State Parks. ''Maintenance issues are not being addressed. That's why we have so many things decaying.''

In 1997 the Friends of Connecticut State Parks and the D.E.P. compiled a wish list, $150 million in capital improvements to the parks. Gov. John Rowland agreed to spend $114 million by 2010, about $12 million per year, Ms. McMasters said. To date, about $60 million has been spent. Those expenditures include the restoration of Gillette Castle, the creation of Fort Trumbull in New London, a new boardwalk at Hammonasset Beach State Park, infrastructure improvements, sewer systems and pumps, parking improvements and more. But that was before budget problems hit the state.

''That money has been cut to zero,'' Ms. McMasters said. ''We cannot raise those millions ourselves.''

Simple maintenance has perhaps been hardest hit. Devil's Hopyard is one example. Although the toilets were useable, it was clear on a recent visit that they had not been emptied in a while. Flies looked to be the most dedicated visitors. Part of a rock wall that protects hikers from plunging from an overpass into a stream has caved in. A bridge that protects visitors from the falls was rotting, nails jutting out from it. Across the park, a railing on a footbridge couldn't wait for salvation: it gave way, its wood now decomposing on a ridge sloping down to a stream.

''They're not picking up the trash, either,'' said Brian Murphy of Mystic as he walked with his dog on a trail through Devil's Hopyard. He waved toward the Vista trail, which draws visitors to a bluff overlooking the Eight-Mile River, the jewel of Devil's Hopyard. ''Most mountain bikers and hikers head up that way to see the view, but now the view includes beer cans and cigarette butts all over the place.''

Department officials rarely complain openly, although in a recent letter to various ''friends'' of the D.E.P., Arthur Rocque, the commissioner, wrote: ''First, approximately 70 people were laid off, resulting in the loss of some of the younger and more talented new employees. Because the layoffs were by bargaining units than funding sources, little General Fund money was saved. Yet some parts of the department were profoundly affected. For example, our information technology and communications programs were virtually eliminated, and our Parks Division took another reduction in what was largely already an inadequate level of staff.''

Publicly, the department's comments have remained consistent. ''When it comes to the services at the state parks,'' David Leff, the deputy commissioner, said, ''the people of Connecticut are getting the absolute best for their dollar.''

But those dollars are now fewer, per average, for the state parks. ''The state parks have lost so much in resources over the years,'' said Alan Williams, a retired special projects manager for Mr. Leff, ''that if anybody were to arrive on Earth today who was here 25 years ago, they wouldn't believe the changes in staffing and funding.''

The state has been trimming away at staffing for the parks since the D.E.P. was created in 1971, said Mr. Williams, who worked on the agency's strategic plan for 2002-4. Since the 1950's, annual park attendance has stayed about level, about 7 million, give or take 100,000 or so visitors, Mr. Williams said, although thousands of visitors go uncounted.

Mansfield Hollow State Park in Mansfield has managed to keep one full-time worker, who is helped along by the Friends of Mansfield Hollow State Park. The Friends group maintains all the park's trails and lobbied successfully for a handicapped-access ramp, composting toilets and a hand pump for water.

''We are very grateful,'' said Betty Robinson, the group's president, ''because we think the reason we are staying open is the Friends group. We're not like Bluff Point in Groton. Now that's a tragedy. They've taken the picnic tables, they've even taken away the directional signs on the trails. I asked Mr. Leff of the D.E.P., 'Do you want people to get lost?'''

Because there are fewer employees manning most of the state's parks this year, friends groups have grown, from 6 in 1994 to 21 in 2003. The groups fear, though, that the state will expect them to take over its responsibilities.

''It's always a fine line between helping and taking over many aspects of the work that needs to be done,'' said Ms. Bloomberg of the Friends of Devil's Hopyard. ''We are here to help, not run the parks.''

Ms. Bloomberg defended Henry Alves, a D.E.P. supervisor whose responsibilities include Gillette Castle, Devil's Hopyard and several other state parks. ''He has his hands full,'' she said.

D.E.P. employees have other defenders as well. ''The people doing the work are absolutely struggling,'' Ms. Pendergast said. ''When you've got one person doing six or seven jobs, things aren't going to get done. If the Legislature knew how hard the rank and file works - foresters working as conservation officers, employees with no ability to requisition a wheelbarrow -- they might see things differently.''
