Lead Crystal Risks

Q. Is it safe to drink from our lead crystal wine glasses?

A. It is probably safe to have wine with dinner from your glasses, though varying trace amounts of lead do leach out of lead crystal, as a Columbia University study found in 1991. Those researchers estimated that the lead released in the course of a meal posed a negligible risk.

Canadian government tests also found that the amount of lead released into a glass of wine in the time a meal can be eaten is well below the Canadian maximum allowable concentration of lead in a beverage, 200 parts per billion.

However, there is a more than negligible danger when liquor, wine or other acidic liquids like fruit juice are stored in a lead crystal carafe or decanter. The lead released builds up over time and can reach 100 times the allowable level after weeks or months, Canadian researchers said. Therefore experts almost universally warn against using lead crystal for storing wine, liquor or any acidic beverage.

There is a risk of significant lead exposure from some ceramics, especially old, hand-painted ones, and even though manufacturers have made progress in eliminating lead from modern plates and cups, an F.D.A. study found that 80 percent of adult exposure to lead came from ceramic mugs used for hot drinks.

Another potential source of lead is the foil sometimes used to cover wine corks, which should be removed before pouring.

Experts suggest that pregnant women and children take extra care to avoid possible lead exposure, like avoiding daily use of lead crystal and ceramic mugs, especially for hot beverages.

C. CLAIBORNE RAY

Q & A  Correction:  September 1, 2003, Monday  The Q & A column in Science Times on Aug. 19 about dangers from lead in food containers misstated the findings of a Food and Drug Administration study of adult exposure. It estimated that 80 percent of adult exposure to lead from food in contact with ceramic holloware comes from frequent daily use of mugs for hot beverages, not 80 percent of all adult exposure to lead.
