Eviction is any New York tenant's worst nightmare.

But imagine having to begin searching for a new home with stalls and feeding troughs instead of bedrooms and a kitchen. Such was the challenge for 15 of the city's carriage drivers, who bypassed the rental market and bought a property on West 52nd Street yesterday for $4 million that they plan to convert into stables.

The carriage drivers were pushed to take action after some 60 horses faced removal from two of the five stables used by the city's approximately 150 carriage horses. One privately owned stable was sold and the other, which is owned by the city, is for sale.

The changes threatened the drivers' livelihoods, to say nothing of their numbers around Central Park, and raising the money to find alternate housing proved daunting. In order to buy the 30,000-square-foot property at 612-618 West 52nd Street, which faces DeWitt Clinton Park, the drivers formed Park View Realty, a limited liability corporation.

''Some of the guys put up their homes,'' said Ed Callaghan, 39, a carriage driver who is among the company's 15 shareholders, adding that he makes about $50,000 a year. ''Our carriages are on the line. We had to put up our medallions. Everything. No one in the industry could afford to go and buy this on their own.''

The drivers culled their savings, asked relatives for loans and secured a $3.34 million loan from Business Loan Express in Manhattan.

Converting the property into a stable will cost the drivers $250,000 to $300,000 more, a process that is expected to be completed by October or November, said Conor McHugh, a driver and the company's chief executive.

The city lent the drivers a hand by providing them, through the Industrial Development Agency, a package of tax and real estate incentives worth about $722,000 to help with the renovation, said Janel Patterson, a spokeswoman for the city's Economic Development Corporation.

As part of the package, Park View Realty will not pay sales tax on materials and construction costs normally incurred in renovations, Ms. Patterson said.

''It means keeping jobs in the city,'' Ms. Patterson said. ''It's also part of the fabric of New York City, the carriage horses in Central Park.''

The new property, formerly a corrugated-box warehouse, is large enough to house about 70 horses, though the shareholders are waiting to see how many drivers will stable horses there before deciding how many stalls to build. Park View Realty will charge $1,000 per horse per month, slightly higher than the $800 and $900 rents charged by the two soon-to-be vacated stables.

''Most of the drivers are going there,'' Martin Dennely, 38, said on a recent hot weekday as he gingerly hosed off Keno, a horse who is stabled elsewhere on West 52nd Street now.

The push to find a new stable began three years ago, when drivers and owners of some 28 horses learned that the owner of a stable at West 52nd Street and Joe DiMaggio Highway had gone bankrupt and that the stable would be sold in foreclosure.

A year later, a group of drivers at another stable, on West 45th Street between 10th and 11th Avenues, which is owned by the city, were told that the property would be sold. The city is talking with a film production company about selling that stable, Ms. Patterson said.

''It's hard to put time frames on things like that because it's a complicated deal,'' Ms. Patterson said. ''It is moving forward, however.''

The stable at West 52nd Street was sold earlier this year, but the drivers who rented stable space there were granted an extension to stay until the fall after the new owners learned that some of the tenants were about to buy the former warehouse down the block.

''We saw the writing on the wall; if we didn't grab something soon, then there was going to be no place for us,'' Mr. McHugh said. ''If we didn't raise the money, the bank wasn't going to get a loan and there was going to be no horse-drawn carriages in Central Park. It was either do something or do nothing.''
