The view was nearly perfect: a sun-filled sky spread across Coney Island's surf and dipped into the glistening ocean.

But then, like a crack running through an old photograph, a bright orange line ruined the picture. The line, a string of warning flags, ran the length of the beach to keep hopeful swimmers out of polluted waters on one of New York City's most alluring summer days.

Yesterday was the fifth day that beachgoers were banned from the water in Coney Island and most other city beaches after the blackout last week caused water treatment plants and a pumping station to spew untreated water and sewage into New York area waters.

Today, all city beaches are to reopen, said Sandra Mullin, a spokeswoman for the city's Department of Health and Mental Hygiene.

But for Nenet Rue, the ban yesterday at Coney Island was especially cruel. It was the first day this summer that she had found time in her busy schedule as a nurse to take her two children, two nephews and a niece to the beach from Jersey City.

''They were so disappointed,'' Ms. Rue, 42, said as she watched the children stand under two showers outside a bathroom near the boardwalk. They had been standing under the water for half an hour.

''They don't even want to be in the sun,'' she said. ''Just the water.''

City officials barred swimming at all public beaches after the blackout so that they could test for fecal coliform levels, or levels of human waste. Thousands of gallons of untreated water overflowed into the East River and other waterways for at least 24 hours after the blackout, said Charles G. Sturcken, a spokesman for the city's Department of Environmental Protection. Initial tests in waters in Coney Island showed high levels of contamination, Ms. Mullin said, though new test results yesterday showed the levels had returned to normal.

The Rockaway Beach and the beach at Jacob Riis Park reopened Sunday, and Orchard Beach was opened yesterday, but the following beaches remained closed yesterday: Brighton Beach and Manhattan Beach in Brooklyn; and Great Kills, Midland Beach, South Beach and Wolfe's Pond in Staten Island.

City officials decided that beaches would reopen today after test results showed their waters were clean.

''Unfortunately we have to err on the side of caution,'' Ms. Mullin said. ''We would rather people not get sick even though it does mean losing a day or two in the sun or the water. We're doing our job.''

About 6,000 people showed up at Coney Island yesterday, many with children carrying plastic pails. The pails sat strewn around beach blankets and towels as children sifted the dry sand with their hands or tried to make sand castles with water from the public bathrooms.

''It's boring,'' said Nassir McGhie, 8, as he scooped up sand.

Lisa McGhie, the boy's mother, said, ''Finally, when the weather gets good, and the water is warm, and you can't go in it.''

While people were advised to sit on the side of the rope closest to the boardwalk and not on the stretch of sand between the rope and the ocean, walkers and runners were allowed closer to the water. Lifeguards said they had to whistle at a few people who tried to get in the water but had no major confrontations.

An 18-year-old Russian man who gave only the name Sergei found the ban strange. As he and his 16-year-old sister walked the beach, at the edge of the water, her feet got wet. Neither of them seemed worried.

''Where we're from in Russia, there's a reservoir and there's a chemical factory right on the shore and people swim there all the time,'' said Sergei, who moved to Brighton Beach a month ago from Zelenograd. ''If people swim there and nothing happens to them then nothing will happen to them here.''

But Sergei noticed that not everyone shared his ease with the idea. ''In Russia, no one trusts the authorities,'' he said. ''Here everyone trusts the authorities.''

Meanwhile, Agnes Dovin and her fiancé, Todd Marsh, took the orange flags in stride. The couple, who visited the beach yesterday with Ms. Dovin's two children, lay their beach towels practically under the row of flags, to be as close to the ocean as possible.

Mr. Marsh said, ''If they change their minds and take it down, we'll be the closest.''
