That innate New York City spirit of braving dark streets and other blackout crucibles spread to the city's beaches yesterday, embodied by a Speedo-clad Valeri Jadov, who refused to let a little waste spillage ruin his fun.

As officials continued to test the recreational waters around the city for bacteria, the public remained barred from the water at six of its seven beaches, including Brighton Beach, Brooklyn, where Mr. Jadov plunged thigh-deep before a lifeguard fished him out with a menacing whistle.

''I keep trying to go in the water, but I keep getting stopped,'' Mr. Jadov, 40, said. ''From my opinion, the water looks clear, and everything smells O.K. I don't understand why they don't just let us go in.''

The reason: some thousands of gallons of wastewater spilled into New York waterways during the blackout, prompting the city to test for dangerous levels of fecal coliform, or human waste.

City officials are awaiting test results for all beaches except Rockaway Beach, in Queens -- the only city beach that was open for swimming yesterday after test results showed that fecal coliform levels in the water were ''within acceptable standards,'' said a spokeswoman for the Department of Health and Mental Hygiene, Sandra Mullin.

At the closed beaches, lifeguards, police officers and posted signs warned about the ban, though people were still allowed access to the sand. City agencies are also warning people not to fish in recreational waters, Ms. Mullin said.

''For the same reason we think it may be unsafe for people to swim until we declare the water safe for swimming, it's not prudent to fish in those waters at this time,'' she said. ''Even in the absence of test results we felt, and still feel, it is prudent to wait.''

The National Park Service reopened the beach yesterday at Jacob Riis Park, a federal recreational area in Queens, and about 20,000 people went there, said Adrian Benepe, the commissioner of the city's Department of Parks and Recreation.

One man who surfs that beach routinely found the waters -- which carried the faint smell of rotting eggs -- less than appetizing.

''It's nasty,'' said the man, Kazu Murai, of Forest Hills, Queens. ''The water seems really disgusting today. It smells really bad, and the color is kind of funny. It seems really brown. I'm not going back in.''

Not to fear, Mr. Benepe said.

''Ocean water, particularly harbor water, tends to be brown because of organic debris -- seaweed, algae and other things,'' he said. ''The thing you worry about in sewage is the stuff you can't see -- coliform bacteria. That's the scary stuff.''

Jonathan Martínez, 13, who lives two blocks from the beach, was of a different mind.

''We came here yesterday, but they wouldn't let us go into the water, and I was really disappointed,'' he said. ''It was really uncomfortable because it was so hot, and now it just feels so good to get into the water.''

His mother, who would not give her name, was less certain. ''I hope it's safe,'' she said.

The blackout caused one large pump station and two water treatment plants to overflow, sending unknown quantities of wastewater into the East River, the Hudson River and lower New York Harbor, said a spokesman for the Department of Environmental Protection, Charles G. Sturcken.

Most of the waste flowed into the East River from the pump station at East 13th Street and Avenue D, which lacked a backup generator and failed to continue pumping waste under the East River to a water treatment plant in Brooklyn, Mr. Sturcken said.

Thousands of gallons of untreated wastewater poured into the river for 24 to 29 hours at that location, he said. But backup generators prevented more than 80 percent of the city's waste from spilling into the water, Mr. Sturcken said.

Generators at a treatment plant in Red Hook, Brooklyn, and one on the Hudson in the West 130's had intermittent problems before eventually quitting, he said, adding that environmental protection officials had been assessing the volume of waste spilled and would report their findings today.

The potential presence of human waste gave pause to some beachgoers. ''We wanted to bring the kids in the water, but we're hoping it's safe,'' said Patricia Virola, who arrived at Rockaway Beach with her five grandchildren. ''The news said it was safe, but we still don't know. It's just so hot out, we had to come down.''

Parents at beaches where the waters were off limits were consumed with the task of keeping their young ones out of the surf. ''We understand why we can't go in, but it's really hard to explain to the children and to keep them in the sand,'' said Asya Vigdorovich, 38, of Brighton Beach. ''We've been moving them away from the water all day.''

THE BLACKOUT: POLLUTION

Correction:  February 10, 2006, Friday  An article on Wednesday about an admission by the New York City Department of Environmental Protection that maintenance lapses at two sewage treatment plants led to the illegal discharge of untreated human waste during the 2003 blackout misidentified the neighborhood of one plant. (The error also appeared in articles on Aug. 18, 2003; Dec. 27, 1989; and Aug. 23, 1987.) Although it is known as the Red Hook sewage treatment plant, it is actually at the Brooklyn Navy Yard.
