Who made off with Jesus?

The question hung in the air of the Church of the Holy Cross in Midtown Manhattan on Sunday after caretakers noticed that a 200-pound plaster rendering of Christ had been removed from a wooden cross near the church's entrance.

Three weeks after a metal money box disappeared from a votive candle rack at the church, the fact that a statue was stolen was less surprising than how it was stolen.

''They just decided, 'We're going to leave the cross and take Jesus,' '' said David St. James, 49, a caretaker who helps maintain the sacristy of the church, on 42nd Street between Eighth and Ninth Avenues. ''We don't know why they took just him. We figure if you want the whole crucifix, you take the whole crucifix.''

Sometime between Friday afternoon, when Mr. St. James locked up the church, and Saturday morning, when another caretaker opened it, the figure of Christ disappeared, church officials said. Mr. St. James said he would have noticed if it had been gone before he left on Friday.

''Every little detail has something to do with your performance, so every little detail catches your eye,'' Mr. St. James said. ''We go through a rich checklist before we get out of here.''

No windows were broken and no signs of forced entry were found, he said.

''We're just at a loss,'' he said, adding that it was possible that the thief or thieves wanted to steal the statue merely for its monetary value.

The statue was about four feet long, with a steel core, Mr. St. James said, and had been bolted to the cross in four places. The crucifix was placed to the east of the main entrance, above a wooden altar and a red velvet kneeler used by worshipers.

The thief or thieves apparently unscrewed two bolts from behind the statue and made off with the other two bolts, which bored through the hands of the statue. The police investigated the theft on Saturday but had no suspects and made no arrests as of late Sunday.

Pat Shenkman, the parish secretary, said: ''Either it was someone who was very angry or someone who is a fanatic and wanted to take it home. It's very baffling.''
