Several waterfront development projects are gaining enough critical mass to reveal silhouettes of the new urban concentrations rising around Boston Harbor.

While the sluggish economy and the challenges of rebuilding near well-entrenched neighborhoods have stalled some big projects, parts of an old elevated highway that walled the water off from the downtown area are being demolished and replaced by a network of new roads, bridges, rapid transit and tunnels that are reuniting the city and its waterfront. The commercial, residential, industrial and infrastructure projects, in construction or recently completed, are creating neighborhoods on the water.

New sections of the Massachusetts Turnpike, Interstate 93 and the New Northern Avenue bridge lead to a range of projects being built or renovated in South Boston: Manulife Financial's $140 million glass-clad office tower, a $700 million convention center with a vaulted roof line, the Silver Line subway station topped by wavelike canopies, old warehouses and a new companion building with 120 condominiums that is the first phase of Beacon Capital Partners' $350 million Channel Center mixed-use complex.

This week, a new $11 million seafood-processing plant owned by the Legal Sea Foods restaurant group, designed with a rooftop cod sculpture, is joining other recent additions to the maritime-industrial enclave.

And while this district has rising vacancies and falling rents along with the rest of the Boston area, investors and developers are competing to bet on the future of the nearly 400-year-old waterfront. In recent weeks, two development teams have submitted proposals, seeking to build a 1.5-million-square-foot mixed-use project on another harbor parcel that city planners are calling the ''core block.''

In the Fort Point Channel section, Tishman Speyer Properties of New York has offered about $500 million to buy 44 old wharf buildings, city officials said.

The city, eager for the area's development to succeed even in this era of tight budgets, has created a $40 million loan fund to provide additional financing to hotel developers, including a group planning an 1,150-room Westin hotel adjacent to a 1.6-million-square-foot convention center scheduled to open next July.

''There's tangible progress, with old buildings coming down and the new convention center and Manulife headquarters building now all enclosed,'' Mayor Thomas M. Menino said. ''This is the new Boston; development at the waterfront will spur economic growth for the whole city.''

Projects are under way in the waterfront neighborhoods of South Boston (sometimes called the seaport district), downtown, East Boston and Charlestown. But the bulk of the building, about 20 million square feet over the next quarter-century, is planned for South Boston: five million square feet of office space, six million square feet of hotels, seven million square feet of housing (about 4,000 units), a million square feet of industrial space and 700,000 square feet of retail operations.

Since 1998, construction has started or been completed on about six million square feet on 70 acres in the South Boston area, which is within walking distance from centers of finance, government, shopping and entertainment, as well as historic attractions.

For decades, the waterfront's link to the downtown transportation grid was tenuous. But since the mid-1990's, $20 billion in public investment has been used to rebuild the transportation network on land, at the port and at Logan International Airport on the harbor's eastern edge, as well as cleaning the harbor's fetid water. Underground, modern telecommunications and utility systems have been threaded through the downtown area and the waterfront.

All year, completed sections of the nation's largest transportation project, the $14.6 billion Big Dig, have slowly opened. For many people, the project's highways, tunnels and bridges have cut suburban commuting times in half.

''It's rare for a city to build a new downtown highway system,'' said Stephen R. Karp, chief executive of the New England Development Company, which expects to start construction later this year on the 800-room first phase of the Westin hotel. The company is also seeking approval for a million-square-foot mixed-use project at Pier 4 and has just bid on the core block project. While noting problems including a still-unfinished infrastructure and lackluster bookings for the convention center, Mr. Karp said, ''When the economy turns around, this will be the first office market to take off because there are no other signature locations or large blocks of space.''

John E. Drew, chief executive of the Drew Company, a real estate development and management concern here, referring to prospects for the property market, said, ''Over the long term, South Boston is where values will grow.''

On an eight-acre South Boston parcel, Mr. Drew's company, in partnership with a unit of Fidelity Investments, developed and opened the 426-room Seaport Hotel in 1998, the 500,000-square-foot World Trade Center East in 2000, the 528,000-square-foot World Trade Center West in 2002, parking for 2,300 cars and, earlier this summer, 45,000 square feet of low-rise offices and retail space that knit the hotel to the west tower.

Several other developers plan to start construction next year in South Boston and the downtown waterfront on 1,040 condominium units, 860 hotel rooms and the $37 million, 62,000-square-foot Institute of Contemporary Art. The museum has signed a 99-year ground lease for $1 a year with the Hyatt Development Corporation.

On the downtown side of the harbor, Equity Office Properties, the city's largest office landlord, plans to start construction next year on a mixed-use complex that includes a 500,000-square-foot office building. ''The market is tough, but quality assets are holding their occupancy,'' said Maryann G. Suydam, an Equity regional vice president, who estimates an 8.5 percent vacancy rate in the company's downtown properties.

In Charlestown, 1.3 million square feet of commercial space, 1,100 housing units and a 168-room hotel have opened in the last year.

East Boston, with views across the harbor from the downtown skyline, is to have the next big wave of building -- 1,500 condominium units with pocket parks, two new subway stops, a new marina and a shipyard. In July, construction started on the $105 million redevelopment of Maverick Gardens, a public housing project where 335 low-cost units and 425 units of market-rental apartments and condominiums are going up near the waterfront and a recently completed park.

Near the park, starting early in 2004, the New Jersey-based Roseland Property Company is to break ground on the $192 million Portside at Pier One complex with 585 housing units, the company's president, Marshall Tycher, said. By 2005, city planners expect construction to start on the $40 million, 109-condominium Hodge Boiler Works and the $200 million Clippership Wharf's 400 condominiums, plus retail space, parks and landings for water taxis.

''We're moving ahead with a whole new neighborhood,'' said Clippership Wharf's developer, Roger Cassin, a partner in Noodle Island L.L.C. ''I'm concerned about the economy, but the optimist in me agreed to do underground parking. We're poised to come on line at the peak of the recovery.''

COMMERCIAL REAL ESTATE
