Two years after the Sept. 11 attacks, a majority of Americans are concerned that they may face more terrorism, and they feel unprepared and have little faith that hospitals and law enforcement agencies can adequately respond, according to a study released yesterday.

Fewer than one in four families have an emergency plan in place, though 81 percent of New Yorkers fear another terrorist attack will occur, according to the survey.

The Marist Institute for Public Opinion polled 1,300 adults from New York City and regions around the nation in August. The survey was commissioned by the National Center for Disaster Preparedness at Columbia University's Mailman School of Public Health, in collaboration with the Children's Health Fund, a nonprofit group based in Manhattan.

''People don't feel like they're being given enough information,'' said Senator Hillary Rodham Clinton, who was present when the study was released at Columbia University.

Only 36 percent of New Yorkers expressed confidence that the city's health facilities could adequately respond to a biological, chemical or nuclear attack, the poll found, a drop from 53 percent of New Yorkers who were asked the same question last year in a related poll.

People generally distrust information regarding terrorist threats, in part because the reports are limited or seem incomplete and too vague, said Dr. Irwin Redlener, director of the center.

The Bush administration, through the Department of Homeland Security, in March last year established a color-coded alert system to keep Americans more informed. Its effectiveness has been questioned.

''Just to put these seemingly random alerts out there does nothing but make people more anxious,'' said Dr. Redlener. ''If we're going to have that kind of system, it should be clear to people what they should be doing.

''People can handle honesty and the public deserves nothing less than that,'' he said.

The uncertainty could explain why nine out of 10 people in New York and nationally said they would not evacuate their homes immediately if ordered to do so by authorities, according to the survey. The anthrax scare following the attacks of Sept. 11 may have helped to shaped this distrust, said Dr. Redlener.

''There's no public sense as to why it happened, how it happened and that it won't happen again,'' said Dr. Redlener. ''This is the kind of event that shakes people's confidence that the government knows how to respond.''

Shaken confidence could translate to a lack of cooperation from the public if another attack occurred and there were an order for an evacuation, said several people who presented the study.

''I really trust New Yorkers and Americans to make good decisions,'' said Senator Clinton, a Democrat of New York. ''But what leads to bad decisions is no information or bad information.''

In July, Mayor Michael R. Bloomberg released an emergency preparedness guide that provides suggestions for how to respond to hazards and emergencies, such as chemical spills. The guide advises New Yorkers to keep handy a Go Bag -- a collection of items needed during an evacuation, including bottled water, cash, documents, medication and granola bars.

But despite local and national publicity about the need for household emergency plans, only 14 percent of New Yorkers polled said their families have such a plan in place. In a typical plan, the government suggests having two days' worth of food and water, a flashlight and spare batteries and a meeting place for family members in case of an evacuation.

Furthermore, only 23 percent of New Yorkers, and 35 percent of those polled nationally, believe that their communities have an adequate emergency response plan in place.

TWO YEARS LATER: THE MOOD
