YVONNE HARTSFIELD glanced down the street to the corner of Read Street and Shelton Avenue in New Haven. ''Oh, good,'' she said. ''The drug dealers are gone for now.'' She opened the gate of the chain-link fence surrounding her little house on Read Street, built courtesy of Habitat for Humanity. Growing there, by the stone walkway and the lawn, was a garden, flooded with color despite the withering heat.

The garden is an oasis on a street that has little in the way of lawns, even less in the way of flowers. One evening, the police were scouring Ms. Hartsfield's gardens, searching for a pistol thrown away by a fleeing criminal. Another day, Ms. Hartsfield's companion, Raphael Chestnut, was hit in the arm by a stray bullet while he sat on the house's front porch. Two years ago, when Ms. Hartsfield moved into her Habitat house, she had never owned or tended a garden, a typical background for Habitat homeowners.

That began to change in 1998, when Deen Day Sanders, then president of the National Garden Clubs, began encouraging garden clubs throughout the country to landscape Habitat houses. Mrs. Sanders lives outside Atlanta, not far from Habitat for Humanity headquarters in Americus.

But it was on a Habitat building site on the lower East Side of Manhattan that she befriended Linda Fuller, another Georgian and the missionary who co-founded Habitat for Humanity with her husband, Millard. Several years later, once Mrs. Sanders became president of the nation's garden clubs, Habitat garden efforts multiplied like day lilies on a New England roadside. Now, about 1,000 garden clubs in 37 states have contributed expertise or money to help construct Habitat house gardens. ''It makes such a difference,'' Mrs. Fuller said.

As romantic a notion as an inner-city oasis may be, luring suburban gardeners to urban streets can be challenging.

''We were nervous,'' admitted Jean Criscuolo, a member of the Garden Club of Woodbridge. But she became comfortable enough to drag her husband, Fred Criscuolo, and son Paul, both cautious certified public accountants, to Read Street one evening to lay the sod for Ms. Hartsfield's front lawn.

After it was done, Ms. Hartsfield sat by her front window most of the night, like a new mother, watching over her grass.

Mrs. Criscuolo led her club's effort to arm Ms. Hartsfield with a garden. Arm her they did, with daffodils and dogwoods, with hostas and hollyhocks. Vandals have poured mysterious substances on the large but now-suffering hosta, its leaves yellowed and shriveled, but Ms. Hartsfield is not particularly perturbed.

''The drug dealers, they're getting used to us, because we're not going anywhere,'' she said. ''Habitat homeowners have a lot of enemies in these neighborhoods, but we don't care. We are going to continue upgrading, upgrading, upgrading.''

This fall, garden clubs in Westport and Glastonbury are taking shovels and plants to new Habitat homes in Bridgeport and Hartford, respectively, to construct gardens. Many of those spearheading the efforts are both Habitat volunteers and garden club members, including Jo Titsworth of the Greens Farms Garden Club in Westport, also a member of Greens Farms Congregational Church. A coalition of Westport congregations that includes the Greens Farms church is now building a Habitat house at 760 Shelton Street in Bridgeport.

After Oct. 15, the target date for completion, the gardeners will move in, or in Mrs. Titsworth's case, simply stay, to begin the landscaping. There isn't much of a budget, and what is there goes toward seeds and soil, so volunteers depend on contributions.

''We're hoping people will donate bulbs and plants,'' Mrs. Titsworth said.

She wants to achieve a balance, she said, between beauty and good sense.

''We have to consult with the homeowner about what they feel they are capable of taking care of,'' she said. ''Some of them only want grass, some of them want to be able to plant vegetables and have a summer garden. We will teach them how to take care of plants, how to care for a yard, how to run a lawnmower.''

Over in East Hartford, the Country Gardeners of Glastonbury were out recently weeding the front yard of a Habitat house that members had landscaped a few years ago. ''I wanted to do something meaningful and long-lasting, something less ephemeral than a floral arrangement,'' said Alice Luster, who also serves, with her husband Duane Luster, on several Habitat for Humanity committees.

Her fellow gardeners echoed her sentiments. They hope, they said, that such efforts inspire other garden clubs to help Habitat homeowners unsure of how to achieve an elusive, and sometimes expensive, curb appeal. Money is almost always an issue with Habitat homeowners, for a variety of reasons.

Before she teamed up with the New Haven-area Habitat, Ms. Hartsfield had been saving to buy a place in Spring Glen in New Haven, which she characterized as ''a better neighborhood.'' She knows the neighborhoods in New Haven well, having grown up in Newhallville. But health problems hampered her ability to pay for a home in Spring Glen so she went to Habitat. For $400 down and 400 hours of sweat equity plus closing costs, she was able to afford the house on Read Street.

''When I was a little girl, this was a beautiful neighborhood, a white neighborhood, and I wasn't allowed to come here,'' said Ms. Hartsfield, passing her hand slowly over a crowd of black-eyed Susans. ''I remember as a child looking from the car, and all the trees would be leaning over in the street. They would be meeting each other with their blossoms.''

She went away for a while, and returned to a neighborhood bereft of blossoms, rife with abandoned houses. ''Habitat has really helped to revitalize our community,'' she said. ''Since Habitat has come in, it's more beautiful here, and people have begun to revitalize themselves, their minds, everything around us. I think God put me here for a reason.''

One of those reasons may rest with her newfound garden friends.

''The day we put that garden in was a perfect day, and the garden club worked so hard so they could have a lawn and garden,'' Mrs. Criscuolo said. ''It was one of the best things I have ever done, and I've been in garden club for 30 years.''
