APROPOSAL to build a theme park near the casinos has caused quite a stir in a region once famed for Mystic Seaport and the Mystic Aquarium. It sounds logical to place family entertainment near the casinos, the state's top tourist draw, but it may not be the slam dunk that some towns surrounding Foxwoods and Mohegan Sun hope. Las Vegas tried the same strategy about 10 years ago and the jury is still out on whether it was a good idea.

Utopia Studios, a New York investment group led by Joseph Gentile, his wife, the actress Cathy Moriarty-Gentile, and Francesca Hilton, the daughter of Zsa Zsa Gabor and Conrad Hilton, has proposed building a theme park similar to Universal Studios in California on the former site of Norwich State Hospital, which is less than 15 miles from the casinos. It is just the latest proposal to build an entertainment park near the casinos to take advantage of the almost 25 million people who go there a year.

''I believe for our casinos to continue to be successful in the future, southeastern Connecticut has to become a destination, especially as other states build casinos," said Bob Congdon, the first selectman of Preston. ''The proposal for the Norwich State Hospital site would do that. It would give people a reason to come to southeastern Connecticut, maybe for the casinos, maybe for this. We definitely need to diversify our area.''

But the question still stands. Do gambling and a family vacation mix? Should the towns who fought the casinos and their continued expansion now open their arms to developers who promise jobs and new property tax revenue? A closer look at Las Vegas shows that the same strategy there ended up with what gaming analysts said were mixed results.

In the 1990's, Las Vegas tried to promote a family-friendly image by building lavish theme parks, spending millions on entertainment to attract families. Although Las Vegas had long seen its share of children, brought by parents who wouldn't, or couldn't, leave them at home, the move worked. The percentage of families visiting Las Vegas rose, from 7 percent in 1992 to 12 percent by 1996.

Then the new approach began to unravel. The MGM Grand Hotel's $100 million Grand Adventures theme park, opened in 1993, closed in 2000, citing poor attendance. Parents who were comforted by the sight of gleaming new theme parks were stunned when a 7-year-old California girl was raped and murdered at a Nevada casino in 1997 while her father was gambling. The city has not added any new major family attractions in years.

Bit by bit, the casinos backed away from the family-friendly focus. As the MGM Grand turned its back on its theme park, it opened La Femme, a revue featuring nude dancers. Other hotels were doing the same. Still, the family numbers did not diminish, fluctuating between 10 and 12 percent of total visitors to Las Vegas over the past four years, according to the Las Vegas Convention and Visitors Authority.

''I think there was a short-term approach to the family market and it has certainly changed,'' said Sandy Zanella, a spokeswoman for the MGM Grand. ''Las Vegas as a whole is an adult playground. Families still come here and they are certainly welcome, but we are geared toward adults.''

So are Connecticut's casinos, and both tribes acknowledge that. Although regional officials were enthusiastic about creating an even larger entertainment area in the region, Mohegan Sun and Foxwoods distanced themselves from promoting the idea of children at their casinos.

''We make a distinction on separating that here,'' said Mark Brown, the chairman of the Mohegan Tribe. ''The retail component, and the restaurants, the arena, the hotels, are not bringing people into gaming. With Las Vegas, you're walking your family past the slot machines to check into the hotel.''

Foxwoods has concentrated on its resort and casino business and was adamant about its adult orientation.

''We are an adult theme park,'' said Bruce MacDonald, a spokesman for Foxwoods. ''We market to adults and we specifically do not market to people under 21 because this is an adult activity. This is not a young person's destination.''

Analysts said whether a theme park would survive in Connecticut depends on several factors. The weather in New England has been a constant issue, said Steven Kent, a gaming and lodging analyst at Goldman Sachs. A theme park also needs to be self-supporting, he said, meaning it cannot rely solely on casino traffic to survive.

''Although a theme park could draw more traffic into that market and could be exceptionally successful, the history on combined family entertainment with casinos is mixed,'' Mr. Kent said, noting Las Vegas's attempts. Alternately, he said that Atlantis, a resort in the Bahamas, successfully mixed a water park with a casino to attract families.

''The Connecticut casinos have reached out to the community, with basketball and concerts and restaurants,'' he said. ''The strategy of reaching out to customers both for their entertainment and gaming dollars has been successful in other markets.''

The numbers for visitors stopping at Mystic attractions then heading to the casinos has increased in the past two years, according to one study. In 2001, 500 people were part of a study done by Mystic & More, a marketing arm of the Mystic attractions. Of those visitors, 19.7 proceeded on to Foxwoods, and 9.9 went to Mohegan Sun. One year later, in a study of 752 people, 32 percent went on to visit Foxwoods and 29 percent to Mohegan Sun, said Diana Ketner, a spokeswoman for Mystic & More. Ms. Ketner could not explain the increase.

''It's hard to track whether people go to the casino and leave the area or visit other attractions,'' said Eliza Cole of Mystic & More. ''We aren't really sure what the precise numbers are.''

The Connecticut theme park proposal, although not detailed, would be primarily indoors. The park would cost about $400 to $500 million to build, with an additional cost for construction of 5,000 hotel rooms, said Mr. Congdon of Preston. The remaining Norwich Hospital acreage might be used for classrooms for Three Rivers Community College and for a marina to be developed by another company, he said.

Utopia Studios had shopped its proposal during the past four years to various municipalities, including the Bronx and Calverton, N.Y. Mr. Gentile said a press conference is scheduled for Friday to reveal his financial backing.

''We've entertained numerous sites, and it's about trying to find the right home,'' Mr. Gentile said. ''I can't tell you much yet, but while this is a standalone project, the traffic -- millions of people -- is already here. This is becoming a destination region, and we're very excited about this site.''

Other theme-park proposals for the area around the casinos have met with resistance. Madeline Jeffery of North Stonington, who helped fight off a Six Flags amusement park proposal in 1997 and tribal land annexations in her town, said developers have been buying the open space around the casinos. Besides tribal purchases, Hackman Capital Properties of California has bought 220 acres this year near the Mohegan Sun casino and is negotiating for more. Michael Hackman, president of the company, said it hasn't decided what to build on the property.

''I would never have built a casino here, I would say you're crazy,'' Ms. Jeffery said. ''But seeing these casinos and seeing the number of people who go up there every day, I can imagine almost anything now. These proposals are all busy work -- it's a reason to come here, to make our towns a resort destination. They're thinking, 'who else can we drag here, and what can we do with the kids?'''

The similarities are striking enough: Las Vegas rose from a dark and desolate plot of sand to a strip of entertainment choices. In southeastern Connecticut, Foxwoods grew from an almost empty reservation.

Bill Eadington, director of the Institute for the Study of Gambling and Commercial Gaming at the University of Nevada, Reno, and a professor of economics there, said the Connecticut casinos are the closest thing to Las Vegas strip casinos that you can find outside Vegas in America.

''Good entertainment, hotels, increasing outdoor recreation,'' he said. ''They are building all the pieces that Las Vegas has developed. My suspicion is, if anywhere else in the country is going to make this transformation, it's southeastern Connecticut or Atlantic City, and Atlantic City still has a seedy day-trip destination feeling to it. Southeastern Connecticut has a critical mass now -- they're generating a couple of billion dollars a year in gaming revenues, mainly day-trip destinations -- and at some point it all starts looking like a potential resort.''

The financial feasibility of building family fun around all the casino traffic is not lost on longtime casino opponents. Jeff Benedict, founder of the Connecticut Alliance against Casino Expansion, said he is sympathetic to the southeastern Connecticut towns who have reaped little benefit from the casinos.

''You can't fault a town like Preston for giving serious consideration for a plan like this theme park,'' Mr. Benedict said. ''It has been largely left out of the massive revenues brought in by Foxwoods and Mohegan Sun. In the best-case scenario, the towns and local tourism districts would be in a place where they could reject out-of-hand any proposal that would feed into gambling, but the landscape here is such that two sovereign tribes have casinos that are not going away. A project like a theme park at least can be taxed and generate money in that way. Are we happy that people are bringing in theme parks that frame casinos as family-friendly? No. Do we think it's healthy for the social policy of Connecticut. No. But with towns buckling under fiscal problems and two casinos that produce billions each year, I can understand it.''

Mr. Congdon of Preston did indeed embrace the proposal. Although the state is responsible for marketing the Norwich Hospital property, the town has the first right of refusal for development proposals. Originally marketed as a biotechnology campus, the 500 acre-campus, reminiscent of a crumbling British estate, has sat unused since the state officially closed the mental hospital there in 1996. Town officials had hoped that Pfizer might build its headquarters there. That did not happen, and little interest has been shown by other companies. A decade ago, there was talk of building an amusement park on the property, but the area was zoned residential. The zoning has been changed since then.

''We definitely need to diversify our area,'' Mr. Congdon said. ''A circus-like atmosphere is not what I envision. What I see is more like Universal Studios in California. People can watch movies being made, and there would be an entertainment component to it, but it would be complementing the movie studio rather than being a Six Flags or other amusement park.''

Tourism and casino spokespeople in southeast Connecticut distinguished between Las Vegas and southeastern Connecticut, which Mystic Seaport and Mystic Aquarium initially established as a family destination. The casinos just added more traffic, they said.

''I have a 10- year old granddaughter, and we've been to Mohegan Sun to go to a basketball game,'' said Larry McHugh, executive director of the Middlesex County Chamber of Commerce and former head of the Connecticut Tourism Council. ''I don't have a problem with it. When people go in and see what it's like, the naysayers will disappear. It's O.K. to go to the Caribbean and stay in a hotel where there's gambling going on and there's no hang-up there. And there's a huge difference between Las Vegas doing that in the 90's and our region.''

He pointed to Mystic Seaport and the aquarium, the Valley Railroad in Essex and the Florence Griswold Museum in Old Lyme.

''Those activities were here before the casinos came in, and this place was already known as a family area,'' he said. ''To have an excellent theme park will boost the attendance at these other venues.''

Although Mr. Eadington acknowledged that some of the Las Vegas theme park investments of the 1990's failed, he pointed to others that succeeded.

''The key statistic is that over all, the number of families coming to Las Vegas has increased,'' he said. ''Those particular investments missed the mark, but the whole package of activities in Las Vegas, including a lot of thrill rides and family entertainment venues, have made the city considerably more attractive to families. There's always been sex in Las Vegas, it's always had an R-rated overtone. But Las Vegas is a diversified and segmented market, and the family market grew through the 90's. Now, Vegas has become a 21st-century recreation center for adults, with a few kids thrown in.''

Connecticut
