IF a federally funded study determines the Metacomet-Monadnock-Mattabesett Trail deserves national recognition, Connecticut residents may have to find a more user-friendly name for it.

The Triple M, perhaps?

This year, the National Park Service, along with the Connecticut Forest and Park Association, began a study to find out if three existing trails -- the Metacomet, Monadnock and the Mattabesett -- should be officially linked to form a 200-plus-mile contiguous recreational trail that will run through Massachusetts and across central Connecticut. If the study, due to wrap up in 2005, determines the designation is possible and that it will help preserve the trails, the park service will recommend that Congress approve it. That would make the Triple M the ninth nationally recognized trail in the country, and the second one in New England after the Appalachian Trail.

''It'll bring a presence to it and permanent recognition,'' said United States Representative Nancy Johnson, who co-sponsored the legislation authorizing the trail study, which was signed into law by President George W. Bush last December. ''Even if we don't get the national designation, the study will teach us about the trail, and the towns along it will connect.''

The Monadnock begins near the New Hampshire-Massachusetts border and runs through central Massachusetts, where it links with the Metacomet. The Metacomet then enters Connecticut in Suffield and runs down the spine of the state where it joins the Mattabesett, which then swirls around in a loop, ending in Middletown. The total length of the trail is more than 200 miles, 108 of which are in Connecticut. It runs through 37 towns in both states.

Ms. Johnson said getting the national designation ''won't happen all at once.'' It is a complicated process, particularly in a state as densely populated as Connecticut. The study has found, for example, that about 60 percent of the property along the trail is owned privately, and not everyone may want a federally recognized trail through their back yards. If a landowner insists they don't want the public to access the trail on their property, the park service will have to find a way to reroute it.

''The jury is still out on whether this will be a positive or negative thing for the town,'' said Elaine A. Sarsynski, the first selectwoman of Suffield, which has a long section of the trail. ''Some abutters have a concern that it will lead to congestion and to people who are unfamiliar with the area trespassing on their property. But on the other hand, there are other groups that welcome the tie-in to the national network because it would mean funds for management, and it would encourage people to hike.''

Since the 1930's, the Metacomet and Mattabesett in Connecticut have been maintained by volunteers from the Connecticut Forest and Park Association, which tends to a 700-mile network of trails throughout the state.

''It's a treasure,'' said Bob Morrison, who heads the trails committee for the association. ''It goes across the ridge, the highest point in Connecticut, and particularly at this time of year, there are many points along the trail where you'd think you were in Canada or Vermont, not an urbanized state like Connecticut.''

The trails run along a rock ridge that basically bisects Connecticut, and developers have eyeballed the ridge as a building prospect because of its sweeping views.

''Every time there's a building boom in Connecticut we feel threatened because people want to build there,'' Mr. Morrison said

Federal recognition, Mr. Morrison and others hoped, will be a tool that helps keep development at bay, though it won't necessarily prevent it. Until now, landowners have agreed to give the public access to the trail through informal verbal agreements, said Kevin Case, who is coordinating the study for the parks service, and that will likely not change.

''If someone has private land and they just have a handshake agreement that the trail runs through their property, they can do whatever they want with their land. There are no restrictions on it,'' Mr. Case said. ''It would be the same with the National Scenic Trail designation.

''You have to work with private landowners, and it's a challenge,'' Mr. Case added. ''It takes a long, long time.''

Developing recreational corridors, or ''greenways,'' like the trail, is a key part of newer land preservation approaches that use natural or manmade features like rivers or railroad tracks as guidelines in protecting contiguous pieces of land. Those corridors then become natural pathways, not just for recreation, but also for wild animals that live in ever-shrinking habitats.

''We encourage this kind of development,'' said Thomas Morrissey, the interim bureau chief of the state's Bureau of Outdoor Recreation. ''Forest and parks are becoming islands, and people say, 'Well, it would be nice to get from here to there'.''

Park service employees spent the summer mapping the trail with global positioning satellites, identifying the private landowners within 250 feet of the trail and documenting all the natural, historical and cultural spots along the corridor. Then, in September, the service sent 1,200 letters to property owners along the trail telling them the study was under way and notifying them of three upcoming public forums they can attend to learn about the process and weigh in.

''We're very early in the process, but we're focusing now on the landowners and how they can be involved,'' Mr. Case said. ''We're really looking forward to the forums and getting a sense of what people are thinking.''

The park service is asking all the towns along the trail to appoint a person to a steering committee that will meet as the study continues and will develop a possible management plan. The committee will also look at extending the trail all the way to Long Island Sound, through either Guilford or Madison.

''Whoever gets there first wins,'' joked Leslie Kane, the environmental planner for the town of Guilford, which has been working to develop a greenway within the town. ''Getting the trail, a greenway, a wildlife corridor has been a priority for the town.''

If federal recognition does come, managing a national trail comes with its own set of problems.

''It's incredibly complicated,'' said Brian King of the Appalachian Trail Conference, the group that manages the maintenance of the nearly 2,200-mile trail that runs from Maine to Georgia. ''On paper you look at it and think, 'That's crazy. That shouldn't work.'''

Mr. King called the Appalachian Trail the country's ''skinniest national park.'' It's entire length is accessible to the public, like a national park, but it runs through private land and is maintained by volunteers. ''The volunteers have to function like a national park staff,'' Mr. King said. ''There's nothing comparable.''

Still, it will be a worthy effort, supporters of the trail said.

''A lot of the times we talk about connections, about wildlife corridors, open space and greenways,'' said Leonard Tolisano, a senior planner for Simsbury, which also has a long section of the trail. ''Trails are the same thing. We want to make those connections because the whole is greater than the sum of its parts.''
