IN the late summer of 2001, Robert Twomey drove his two sons south. His older, Emeric, was starting college at Clemson. The younger son, Robert, still in high school, went along, and they drove on to the University of Georgia, which the elder Robert had attended 25 years earlier.

Only days after returning to New York, Mr. Twomey, who had cut short his quest for a doctorate to take a Wall Street job when Emeric was born, died in the north tower of the World Trade Center on Sept. 11.

''One of the first things that hit my mind was, it was crazy, but the kids are college age, what will I do?'' his wife, Marie Harvey Twomey, said. ''My son came home from Clemson fired up to go in the Army. He thought it was his job to come home and take care of me.''

Today, both sons are in college -- Robert at Georgia and Emeric closer to home at Fordham -- and they are among the first of what could be hundreds of Sept. 11 survivors who will benefit from a scholarship fund created in response to the attacks.

Two years after Sept. 11, $2.9 billion has been given to and more than $2.2 billion has been spent by Sept. 11 charities, said the Foundation Center, which will soon issue an update. Donations have slowed, and charities have begun to consider phasing out programs that delivered urgent support. The September 11 Fund, the second largest of the 350 funds created after the attacks, will cut off enrollment for some programs on Jan. 31 and close its office in 2004.

Still, the Foundation Center estimates that more than $600 million remains unspent, and the focus has turned to administering programs over the long term. As money for emergency aid, employment assistance and cash grants to survivors is spent, at least two charitable efforts will live on for years -- delivery of mental health services and college scholarships.

''You have to think about this not so much as a distribution process, but how people recover from something awful that happens to them,'' said Nancy Anthony, the executive director of the Oklahoma City Community Foundation, which administered the charitable aid to victims and survivors of the 1995 bombing there. ''There is a period of emergency relief, and then after the first year, people come to grips with, 'How am I going to live the rest of my life?' ''

In Washington, the Survivors Fund of the National Capital Region reported a big increase this year in requests for mental health assistance, and administrators think the demand will continue for another three years. There was a similar delayed reaction in Oklahoma City.

In New York, charities have not seen a similar surge in requests for mental health assistance. ''The only thing we know is that when we do a lot of promotion, more people come, and when we don't, they don't,'' said Jeanine Moss, the spokeswoman for the September 11 Fund.

Still, the 9/11 Mental Health and Substance Abuse Program in New York, which is run by the September 11 Fund and the American Red Cross, will remain open through at least 2005, Ms. Moss said. The program has 7,000 enrollees, including evacuees, witnesses, displaced residents, rescue workers and survivors, as well as their families. Half of its budget is unspent.

By contrast, the Families of Freedom Scholarship Fund has spent hardly any of its large commitment. More than 1,500 survivors of victims are under age 15, and they will probably get money from scholarship donations through 2027. The scholarship fund, with $125 million, was created within days of the attacks by some Midwest-based foundations. It has exceeded even early ambitions. ''It was interesting to see how education was seen as a powerful, meaningful way for people to respond, not just in the usual ways,'' said William C. Nelsen, the president of Scholarship America, formerly the Citizens' Scholarship Foundation of America, in St. Peter, Minn.

The effort started with a call on Sept. 13 from Susan O. Conner, the executive vice president of the Lumina Foundation for Education in Indianapolis to Scholarship America. As money flooded in to the Red Cross and United Way for emergency aid, other charities looked for a different way to harness the response.

''We felt we could take a view of the long term, and that brought us directly to our own mission to help secure post-secondary education for those dependents,'' said Martha Lamkin, the president of the Lumina Foundation.

Dr. Nelsen said, ''We thought we might be able to do $25 or $50 million and would feel great about it.'' But early responses from corporate givers made them more ambitious, he said. By the end of September, Families of Freedom Scholarship Fund set a goal of $100 million.

The goal was reached in a year, and has been exceeded by $25 million. A second fund, to help families in Lower Manhattan, was started last year; $6 million has been raised. Some colleges and state governments also offer grants or tuition breaks to survivors.

''One worry we have all shared is whether we would we be able to find all the eligible beneficiaries,'' Ms. Conner said. ''It's been a bigger challenge than anyone expected.''

Scholarship American has registered more than 3,400 beneficiaries, including spouses. So far, 297 have received tuition grants, totaling $3.1 million. ''Everyone gets a minimum of $1,000,'' Dr. Nelsen said. ''We will be looking at financial need at the time a student enrolls in college, and they will get anywhere from $1,000 to $18,000 or $20,000 a year,'' he said.

Mrs. Twomey said that the scholarships pay about two-thirds of her costs. ''I'm really grateful to all those companies that chipped in because it was a huge relief,'' she said. ''It was a major comfort to know that I wouldn't have to worry about college.''

9/11
