THE art critic Hilton Kramer once called Ben Benn, who died in 1983, one of the best painters in the United States. But on a recent Monday night at Winter Associates, a Plainville auction house, just a few visitors took note of Mr. Benn's paintings, including an eye-catching portrait of a black-haired, black-eyed woman, lips the color of spilled blood.

The piece was one of more than a dozen, several by Mr. Benn, belonging to the New Britain Museum of American Art, which was cleaning house in a process known as deaccessioning. The auctioneer, Linda Stamm, cajoled, but there were no buyers for several paintings. Mr. Benn's work, ''Portrait of Velida,'' eventually sold for $392.

''They got a good deal,'' said Paula Reens, director of Wilton's Branchville Soho Gallery, which handled the Benn estate. ''He's in 32 museums, and those in the know have bought his work. He is going to pop, and that work is going to be worth far more.''

Anyone who believes that a good find at an auction is fantasy need only look at the sales featuring museum deaccessionings, particularly the so-called country auctions, to learn otherwise.

Like the New Britain museum, the Wadsworth Atheneum Museum of Art in Hartford, the Museum of Fine Arts in Boston, Historic Deerfield in Massachusetts, the Connecticut Historical Society and other institutions periodically edit their collections, and then auction pieces in Connecticut.

''Some of the things that come out of auction are unbelievable,'' said Joseph Collins, an antiques dealer from Cobalt who was at the New Britain sale. ''The museums and historical societies sometimes hire these young kids to deaccession, and they don't always know what they're doing.''

Joseph Wei, a Farmington dealer in Asian art also at the sale, disagreed. Holding an Oriental vase, he inspected it carefully. He was skeptical, he said, of finding any treasures at an auction.

''Flaws, condition problems, all sorts of issues can come up,'' he said, adding, ''I just don't know if you're going to find something wonderful at a little country auction.''

Still Mr. Wei admitted, ''I've had luck in some of the most unlikely of places.'' He became the sole bidder on the Oriental vase, and moments later, its owner. ''Shh,'' he said, grinning. ''Don't give away my secrets.''

Deaccessioning is a delicate process. The ethical code of the American Association of Museums says that institutions are not to sell works to raise money for general upkeep. The code says that works should be sold only ''for the advancement of the museum's mission,'' adding that proceeds should not go to ''anything other than acquisition or direct care of collections.''

''There are two economies in museums: the operating budget and the acquisition budget, and may they never cross the line,'' said Peter Sutton, director of the Bruce Museum of Arts and Science in Greenwich, and former director of the Wadsworth Atheneum. ''If you sell something from a museum, you need to buy something else,'' he continued. ''When you sell to help the operating budget, I always liken it to burning the furniture to keep warm.''

Another concern is that donors, especially those who gave the works being sold off, may be upset and discouraged from further donation. The possibility of a brouhaha from donors, or even from the public, keeps some museums from publicizing their names during auctions. At the Winter Associates auction, for example, several pieces from ''the collection of a New York City Museum'' were being sold.

''Some institutions simply want to be identified as a Northeast museum or something equally nebulous,'' said Ms. Stamm, the auctioneer. ''But others want items to be specifically identified as coming from their collection, because they think they will get a greater return on the object.

''I've never understood the hesitation,'' she added. ''You're not weakening the museum's collection, but rather strengthening it, getting rid of something of less importance when there are better examples.''

Museums are generally careful, curators said, to let donors know they are considering a deaccessioning.

''An object may be of relatively small value, and by virtue of the donor or heirs of the donors, the amount of money to be gained may not be significant enough to the museum compared to the public relations damage it is going to do,'' said Willard Holmes, director of the Wadsworth Atheneum. ''No two deaccessionings are ever the same. Sometimes the message it might send outweighs the value.''

Deciding what to sell off is another issue. There may be internal disagreements about what should go, as well as public disapproval of the sale.

A few decades ago, the New York Historical Society was hanging from a financial cliff and so decided to sell millions of dollars worth of art and artifacts. People who knew its holdings were horrified because in storage were a large collection of Tiffany glass and paintings from the Hudson River School. Many of those works were sold.

Some museum curators are reluctant to discuss their policy on deaccessioning. Douglas Hyland, director of the New Britain museum, refused repeated requests to discuss this specific issue. But Amanda Lange, curator of historic interiors at Historic Deerfield, said that institution had ''a strategic plan for deaccessioning.''

''It comes down to filling gaps and refining the collection,'' she said. ''We may have 17 of this form and none of this form. What might be a little uncomfortable for the buyer is that they may be buying the museum's mistakes, especially with a piece of furniture. People think, 'Well, why are they selling it?'''

Deerfield's last major deaccessioning was seven years ago, until this year, when it sold several items earlier this month.

Connecticut curators generally believe deaccessioning clarifies and strengthens museum collections.

''It's a good thing to do,'' said Mr. Sutton of the Bruce. ''Otherwise, you have situations where you have burgeoning storerooms where things are never seen. Why not give it back to the public, rather than have it sit in the dark?''
