THE 1,200 workers at the streamlined, automated plant here that makes Polartec, the popular cold-weather fabric, are having to live with the possibility that their jobs will be exported to China. If that happens, their chances of finding other work that pays as well are slim.

The employees of Malden Mills Industries have been on such a precipice before, and now, as then, they are looking to their longtime leader, Aaron M. Feuerstein, as their best hope to keep working at one of the nation's most technologically advanced textile factories.

The company, which emerged last month from bankruptcy court protection, is now being managed by its creditors, and they have indicated that they may move production overseas. But Mr. Feuerstein, 77, whose family founded the business nearly a century ago, has said that he can stay here and make a profit if he regains control of Malden. To help raise the financing to buy it back, he wants to develop some of the old brick mill buildings into housing, with a main street on one side and an expansive pond on the other.

This week, he and a new partner intend to present the board of directors with a novel plan to repurchase the company. In September, Mr. Feuerstein agreed to enter a joint venture with the Winn Companies, a real estate developer in Boston. Their deal links the Malden buyback and the plant's continued operation to the renovation of a million square feet of historic mills at its 28-acre site into 600 low- and moderately priced rental apartments.

Winn would invest $7.7 million in Malden and help secure an additional $70 million in private and public financing to let the partnership buy back the company from creditors led by GE Capital. In exchange, Winn says it plans to invest $100 million to redevelop the red brick behemoths into the largest infusion of new housing here in 130 years, according to Mayor Michael J. Sullivan. And as singular as this plan may be, other owners of small and midsize factories are also investing in surprising ventures to generate cash that can be pumped back into factories to keep them afloat.

The Malden strategy of raising capital for the factory with a real estate deal is unusual, but sound in concept, according to John K. McIlwain, a senior fellow for housing at the Urban Land Institute, a research group based in Washington. ''Factories usually sell or lease their property, then leave,'' he said. ''But Malden is using its mills as an asset that qualifies for historic- and low-income housing tax credits, which make the deal work.''

In Lawrence, the jobs making Polartec are needed. It is the nation's 23rd-poorest city and has an unemployment rate of 15 percent, versus 5.6 percent for the state and 6 percent for the nation. ''The community needs the jobs, the affordable housing and the Feuersteins, who support many local charities they don't take credit for,'' Mr. Sullivan said.

Mr. Feuerstein won prominence in 1995, after a fire devoured much of his plant. Rather than use the $300 million in insurance to retire or to move the factory to a region with lower costs, he built and equipped a modern textile mill here. In the aftermath of the fire, he spent about $25 million to pay its 2,000 workers their salaries for three months.

Despite the efficiency of the $440 million, 500,000-square-foot factory, the company landed in bankruptcy court proceedings, for the second time in 20 years, in November 2001. It attributed the move to lower demand because of warm weather, the recession and high debt.

Last year, under the creditors' management now led by David S. Orlofsky, Malden entered a joint venture to make fabric in China with Shanghai Challenge Textiles. In the future, the creditors are likely to ''relocate a substantial portion of Malden's operations overseas,'' Mr. Orlofsky wrote to the Export-Import Bank last August.

''We'd like to do more business in Asia,'' he said in an interview. ''We'll do something with the real estate; maybe a sale lease-back.''

This year, Malden has sold 21.5 million yards of fabric, much of it Polartec, for about $170 million and is profitable, before restructuring and other charges, Mr. Orlofsky said. In 1994, it sold about $190 million in apparel fabric but also had about $200 million in sales of upholstery fabric, a business it has since suspended.

Saving factories is crucial for the nation's future economic health, according to Representative Donald A. Manzullo, Republican of Illinois. Last summer, he was one of several officials, also including Linda M. Conlin, the Commerce Department's under secretary for trade, and Senators Judd Gregg and John E. Sununu, Republicans of New Hampshire, who wrote letters to the Export-Import Bank urging it to grant $35 million in guarantees for Mr. Feuerstein's repurchase of Malden. If the guarantees are not granted, Representative Manzullo wrote, ''these manufacturing jobs will be sent to China.''

He said factories are needed for reasons beyond the tangible goods they produce. ''Malden is one of few textile factories left in the country, and without manufacturing, agriculture, mining, we can't be self-sustaining; we'll become a third-rate country,'' said Representative Manzullo, chairman of the House Small Business Committee.

Some manufacturers can thrive in high-wage countries like France, Italy, Taiwan, Germany and the United States, according to research by Richard Lester, director of the Industrial Performance Center at M.I.T. ''The world is more diverse than conventional wisdom indicates,'' he said, adding that in the right business climate, ''we've observed that textile, apparel, automotive, electronics and software manufacturing can be done.''

From 1995 to 2002, the number of factory jobs rose 22 percent in Canada and 24.6 percent in Spain, versus a loss of 11.3 percent in the United States, a study by economists at Alliance Capital Management showed.

''What's important,'' said John Case, author of ''Open-Book Management'' (Harper Business, 1995), ''is to cultivate a U.S. manufacturing sector that can compete globally and spawn other world-class companies that will lead us to overall economic success.''

MALDEN, with its focus on technology and research and development, is an American manufacturer that can thrive, said Lawrence H. Curtis, the developer who is a partner at Winn. ''With the added discipline of our business skills, we think Malden can expand on its talents to enhance its profitability,'' said Mr. Curtis, who with Mr. Feuerstein plans to present the real estate buyback plan to the board, which must pass judgment on it.

Mr. Curtis added, ''The driving force here is to save the company and its jobs for the region and produce affordable housing in an era of scarce government resources.''

Among other companies that are looking for ways to enhance cash flow for their manufacturing operations is a business in Springfield, Mo., that builds diesel engines. In 1983, the manufacturing operation, now called SRC Heavy Duty, was spun off by a group of employees from International Harvester. It then had $16 million in annual sales and 119 workers; it now has $50 million in annual sales and 334 workers.

By 1987, John P. Stack, now the chief executive of the SRC Holdings Corporation, the parent company of Heavy Duty, realized that the factory needed an outside cash flow to survive. Since then, SRC has started or invested in 26 other companies that are now subsidiaries. The parent company is projecting revenue of $225 million and net income of $8 million for the 2003 fiscal year, which ends on Jan. 31. From that, about $2 million a year flows into Heavy Duty, which needs a profit of 4 percent to stay competitive but earns only 2 percent to 3 percent a year, Mr. Stack said.

''We took our manufacturing discipline into the service sector to develop new sources of revenues,'' he said. The services include factory logistics, salvage, software for truckers, publishing, a spa for teenagers and a bank. ''Without creating these other businesses we couldn't have survived,'' he said.

''Manufacturing has very slim margins, but if a company innovates, the margins can be incredible, like the 17 percent we earned this year at our publishing company,'' he said. ''Manufacturing will come back as wages rise in places like Japan and Taiwan and if we get trade policies that level the playing field. Until then, we overcome the tough cycles with sister businesses.''

ANOTHER company that is leveraging its manufacturing expertise is the 149-year-old Menasha Corporation, based in Neenah, Wis. Menasha sells $1.1 billion a year in containers and packaging and is developing labels embedded with computer chips that use radio frequencies to transmit data about a package: where it is and how long it has been there. By 2005, Wal-Mart Stores and the Defense Department want their suppliers to use this radio frequency identification technology, or RFID. Menasha executives hope that by next spring, the RFID labels will be a new business it can spin off or a service it can sell.

''It's totally new for us; an Internet I.T. play that uses intellectual capital from our manufacturing to create a new stream of revenue we can plow back into the factory,'' said Mike John, a company spokesman. The money is sorely needed: the company laid off 112 of its 5,300 workers this year. ''With profits tight and customers moving offshore, we need this new income,'' Mr. John said.

In Lawrence and across the country, factories that fortify themselves with new revenue streams prove a point, Mayor Sullivan said. ''If Malden keeps operating in Lawrence,'' he said, ''it shows that manufacturing can still be alive in the U.S.A.''
