KATHARINE HEPBURN'S house needs a little work, but it is still ''Kate's house,'' so the $12 million asking price isn't scaring off prospective buyers.

''I have one client who's seen it four times,'' said Colette Harron of the Mitchel Agency, the real estate firm in Essex that got the listing when the house went on the open market a month ago. ''I don't want to say it because it might jinx it, but let's just say there's been a lot of interest.''

Miss Hepburn lived in the nine-bedroom house facing Long Island Sound in Old Saybrook's Fenwick borough for most of her long life, and for locals it will be a long time before the mansion shakes off any memory of the legendary actress who died last June at 97.

The first people who had an opportunity to buy the house were her neighbors. The Borough of Fenwick is politically distinct from Old Saybrook and has its own governing board that manages the section's public golf course, oversees the tennis courts and approves any new construction. As is the custom when any property comes up for sale in the borough, Miss Hepburn's house was first offered to Fenwick residents, some of whom were concerned the house might be knocked down and one, or even two, new houses built in its place. There were no takers, so the executors of Miss Hepburn's will began hunting around for a broker.

Ms. Harron's family-owned agency, in the town next to Old Saybrook, beat out a number of real estate heavyweights, including Sotheby's International, to claim the listing earlier this fall.

''She always used local people, and local merchants,'' said Ms. Harron, explaining why her agency may have edged out the others.

The white brick, ''cottage style'' house was built in 1939 after the 1938 hurricane destroyed the previous Hepburn family house. ''It was built to make sure it would withstand other hurricanes,'' Ms. Harron said, brushing off the notion that the house was allowed to deteriorate. ''Like any old house, it needs work. An old house is an old house.''

Prospective buyers who actually want to see for themselves have to be vetted for financial soundness before they get a peek inside. ''They have to be qualified,'' said Ms. Harron, explaining that the agency needs letters from lawyers or banks as proof. Otherwise, ''I'd just take people on tours.''

The 8,000-square-foot, 19-room house faces 600 feet of waterfront on three acres. An adjacent four-acre lot was left by Miss Hepburn for conservation and ''exclusively public purposes,'' though it's not quite clear what entity it will go to yet.

The house itself is assessed at just under $1.4 million, but Ms. Harron said the $12 million price tag is not just because of Miss Hepburn's legacy. She said it is a large house, right on the water and includes three acres. The last house that sold in the borough went for $4.8 million in 11 days and was one-third the size.

''This is the pearl of Fenwick,'' Mr. Harron said, ''the jewel in the crown.''

UPDATE
