IN one Connecticut bar recently, a bartender served drinks to a row of customers as they tipped their cigarettes into plastic ashtrays, filling the air with smoke.

In another bar, another bartender also served customers, but the bar stood empty of ashtrays and the air was smoke-free.

Both places had all the makings of the classic watering hole - the bottles of liquor, the beer taps, the regulars perching on stools. But, at least for now, that other atmospheric bar ingredient, smoke, is legal in one place and not the other.

Following the lead of other states, including New York, Connecticut lawmakers overwhelmingly approved a law earlier this year banning smoking in all restaurants and bars throughout the state. But there's a difference in Connecticut, one that has customers and restaurateurs perplexed and a little angry, and some legislators pushing to tweak the new rules.

The law is taking effect in two parts. As of Oct. 1, smoking was banned in restaurants, including those with separate bar areas, and owners were required to put up ''no smoking'' signs. Then, on April 1, 2004, bars have to follow suit.

The lag time between the restaurant smoke ban and the bar ban has Connecticut restaurateurs, many of whom depend on their bar business more than their dining patrons, angry as they watch their regulars file out the door to places where they can still light up. And while the ban is a victory for public health that has delighted nonsmokers and even improved dining business at some restaurants, many in the state's service industry see it as flawed, inconsistent and unfair.

''I used to close down at 1 a.m.,'' said Nick Jhilal, manager of the Bear and Grill in Fairfield, who estimated that he had lost 30 to 40 percent of his bar patrons to bars where they can still smoke. ''Now I close down at 9:30. The next three hours are dead.''

In Connecticut there is a range of permits that allow places to serve alcohol. The bulk of permits are issued to restaurants, which serve food as well as liquor, and to bars, which get what is called a ''cafe'' license and are allowed to serve liquor with food on the side, if they choose.

Restaurants throughout the state, especially those with closed-off bar areas, are being hard-hit by the ban, and the economic effects have some lawmakers wondering about the wisdom of the new rules.

''This legislation damaged the marketplace,'' said Simon A. Flynn, president of the Connecticut Restaurant Association, who said he had heard from dozens of restaurant owners, one of whom said he lost $10,000 in the first month of the ban. ''It doesn't make sense. The bars are luxuriating in this inequity.''

In the meantime, many restaurateurs are simply looking the other way as smokers light up because they can't afford to lose their business.

''People leave, people just walk out,'' said Tina McManus, a bartender and waitress at Black Rock Castle in Bridgeport, which is in a strip of bars and restaurants lining Fairfield Avenue through Fairfield and into Westport. ''The whole law is ridiculous.''

Ms. McManus, a smoker herself, estimated that 90 percent of the restaurant's customers are smokers and many are going to more smoke-friendly places. That's a financial hit many restaurants apparently aren't willing to take. ''They're cheating,'' Ms. McManus said of other restaurants in the area. ''They have to.

''I don't like smelling smoke. I don't like it on my clothes. But I like walking home with a bundle of cash,'' Ms. McManus added, noting that smokers who are allowed to smoke tend to linger longer and buy more drinks. ''If you did a survey of employees, no one would agree with the ban. You're taking money out of our pockets.''

Under the new law, people can be fined $99 if they are caught smoking in a no-smoking establishment. The business itself is only required to post ''no smoking'' signs and can be fined $99 if it does not, but it is not fined if customers are actually smoking. The only people who can issue the $99 tickets are the police, and police departments around the state said they have more pressing issues than tracking errant smokers.

''I wish I had the time to proactively check restaurants,'' said Louis DeCarlo, chief of the Stamford Police Department. ''We're taking the tack that most police departments are. We're only responding to complaints.''

According to the State's Liquor Control Division, which issues liquor permits, the license of a restaurant or bar can be revoked by the state for violating the ban. But that would likely happen only if the police or a customer complained to the state, prompting the liquor commission to investigate. And even then it is not clear what would set off the commission's inquiry -- an establishment's failure to post signs, as the new law requires, or its failure to actually pluck cigarettes from smokers' mouths.

''We would expect a licensed permit holder to comply with the state law, and if it was found not to be, we would investigate,'' said John Suchy, director of the division. Then, ''Based on our determination we could take regulatory action.''

When asked how many times an establishment would have to violate the law, or in what way, before the commission took action, Mr. Suchy said: ''It's going to be on a case-by-case basis. I'm not going to say what the commission might do.''

Local departments of public health, which issue food permits to restaurants, also do not have a direct enforcement role, although they can revoke a food license for repeated violations of the ban and can subtract points from annual inspections. Under the new law, though, it's not clear how many violations it would take for a health department to rescind a license.

''It says violations, plural,'' said Michael Lauzier of the American Lung Association of Connecticut.

Some places are willing to take the risk.

''What are they going to do, have a smoking force, like the Gestapo?'' said Richard Ball, owner of Jeremiah Donovan's on Washington Street in South Norwalk. ''Enforcing the thing's a joke. That's a full-time job.''

Mr. Ball said the ban had been a mixed blessing for his business.

''I know there are people who used to come in every night that are going someplace else for now,'' he said. ''But my lunch business is up 25 percent. I think it's very positive. It's a nasty habit and this is what the state is trying to tell you.''

Nonetheless, Mr. Ball said, late at night, after the dining rush is over, ''People can light up and I probably wouldn't say anything.''

Jeremiah Donovan's is among many of the state's restaurants who said business has improved since Oct. 1.

''Actually, it's kind of interesting,'' said John Black, a bartender at Dunville's Westport. ''Our dinner sales have gone up. People are starting to look at us as more of a restaurant than a bar now.''

Still, the change hasn't pleased everyone and some lawmakers are responding.

Under the original version of the bill introduced earlier this year, the General Assembly's Public Health Committee adopted a provision that would allow separate smoking rooms in bars, but the idea was dropped. Now, Representative Art Feltman, Democrat of Hartford and House chairman of the committee, said he would support changing the law to include that provision again.

''If there is a huge drop in revenues at bars,'' Mr. Feltman said, ''I'd be open to that proposal.''

In early November, Gov. John G. Rowland told a reporter that he believed restaurants and bars should be allowed to establish separate smoking rooms, but Mr. Feltman said he didn't feel a change should go that far. ''It should never extend to restaurants,'' he said.

Dean Pagani, a spokesman for the governor, said Mr. Rowland's remarks were made in an off-hand way. ''It got really overblown. He was really just expressing his opinion,'' Mr. Pagani said. ''He's really leaving it up to the Legislature He has no intention of proposing that.''

So, for the time being, restaurants are adjusting to the ban and bars are gearing up for what could be a big financial blow. The only establishments that will clearly see a rise in smokers' business are private clubs, like boat clubs or some social clubs, which have different liquor licenses that will allow smoking even after the ban.

''Our sense, from a number of different restaurateurs is that part of the competition they face now is from private clubs,'' said Mr. Flynn of the restaurant association. ''What we're hearing is that clubs are developing different categories of memberships, like associate memberships, to allow more members. Individuals that might not qualify under the rules of membership are now eligible.''

At some private clubs, employees rejected the idea of a smoking ban.

''This is not Cuba,'' said David Duncan, a bartender at a Veterans of Foreign Wars post in Norwalk. ''Next thing you know people are going to be telling you to be home at 11 o'clock at night.''

But this raises another issue, restaurant owners said. If the bill was intended to protect the health of employees in bars and restaurants, don't employees in clubs deserve the same protection?

''Are they protected under the law or not?'' asked Mr. Jhilal of the Bear and Grill, who said he has hired lawyers to look into whether the law violates the 14th amendment of the Constitution, which guarantees equal protection.

''If it is a public health issue, then it should be a statewide ban,'' Mr. Flynn said. ''If they can't do that, they should retreat to a position whereby the only ban on smoking in the state is in dining rooms.''

Or smokers can find refuge in Rhode Island, where smoking is still allowed in restaurants and bars, or perhaps New York, where some lawmakers are attempting to roll back a ban that went into effect in July.

The bill, co-sponsored by Republican Assemblymen Howard Mills and Matthew Mirones would allow bars to buy ''smoking licenses'' for $100 a year.

''I think people should make their own choices, and I was very concerned about the bars in my district that are going out of business,'' Mr. Mills said, noting that his district abuts New Jersey, where smokers are spilling over the state border to bars that still permit smoking.

''This is based on personal liberty and freedom of choice issues,'' Mr. Mills added. ''I'm not even a smoker myself.''
