A federal judge ruled on Wednesday that John W. Hinckley Jr., who shot President Ronald Reagan in 1981, was mentally stable enough to be allowed unsupervised visits with his parents outside the psychiatric hospital he has lived in for more than 20 years.

The judge, Paul L. Friedman of the Federal District Court for the District of Columbia, ruled over the objections of the former president's family and federal officials. But he placed heavy restrictions on Mr. Hinckley's movements, confining him to the Washington area and placing enormous responsibilities on his parents, John and Jo Ann Hinckley. They will be required to supervise him on any trip from the hospital, to monitor his mental condition and to maintain daily contact with the hospital. A violation of any of these conditions, Judge Friedman said, would terminate the liberties granted.

Mr. Hinckley, now 48, was found not guilty by reason of insanity in the shootings of President Reagan, his press secretary James Brady and two law enforcement officials and in recent years has argued that he is stable enough to spend time away from the hospital without hospital personnel who have accompanied him on hundreds of supervised trips since 1999.

While Judge Friedman concluded that the evidence in the case convinced him that Mr. Hinckley would ''not be a danger to himself or others,'' his ruling was immediately criticized by Mr. Reagan's wife, Nancy, and the Justice Department on behalf of all the shooting victims, including Mr. Brady, who suffered brain damage from his wounds.

In a statement, Mrs. Reagan said: ''Although the judge limited Mr. Hinckley's travel to the Washington, D.C., area, we continue to fear for the safety of the general public. Our thoughts are with all of Mr. Hinckley's victims today, especially Jim Brady and his family, as they must continue to live with the tragic consequences of the assassination attempt.''

Mark Corallo, a spokesman for the Justice Department, said: ''Mr. Hinckley's atrocious acts forever impacted the lives of his innocent victims and their families. It is unfortunate that the concerns of the Reagan and Brady families were not accorded more weight in this decision.''

While the decision could be appealed if the opponents believed they could argue that there had been an erroneous interpretation of the law, the Justice Department was silent about any appeal in its statement, and Mr. Hinckley's lawyer, Barry W. Levine, said he thought an appeal was unlikely.

Mr. Hinckley and his parents, who are in their 70's, were ''very gratified and elated'' by the ruling, Mr. Levine said. He called it a ''very measured and reasonable'' ruling by a judge ''whose inquiry was probing and his comments insightful.'' For that reason, he added, the public ''should derive great comfort'' in the decision.

Even psychiatric experts for the government had agreed that Mr. Hinckley would pose no physical danger to himself or others. Still, Judge Friedman rejected Mr. Hinckley's request for more liberal conditions in favor of a more stringent proposal from the hospital.

On March 30, 1981, as Ronald Reagan walked to his limousine after delivering a speech at the Washington Hilton, Mr. Hinckley opened fire with a .22-caliber pistol and wounded the president and three others. One bullet lodged inches from the president's heart.

Mr. Hinckley had apparently acted to impress the actress Jodie Foster, leaving behind a note that said, ''I'm asking you to please look into your heart and at least give me the chance, with this historical deed, to gain your respect and love.''

After a seven-week trial, Mr. Hinckley was found not guilty because of his mental condition, setting up the future possibility that he would be allowed to walk free. He was sent to St. Elizabeths hospital here, rather than a federal prison.

Judge Friedman's ruling, following a five-day hearing last month, gave Mr. Hinckley the freedom to taste a more normal lifestyle, despite the arguments of the government and Mr. Reagan's family that Mr. Hinckley had the ability to mask his illness and was still a threat.

Robert Chapman, an assistant United States attorney, recently told the court that Mr. Hinckley had ''a history of deceptiveness.'' And Mr. Brady's wife, Sarah, wrote to the court, ''My main concern is with the certainty that Mr. Hinckley is indeed not a danger to himself or anyone else.''

Jo Ann Hinckley told the court, ''There's no issue of dangerousness with John at all.''

The judge's conditions allow Mr. Hinckley to prove himself worthy of freedom over a series of journeys away from the hospital for prescribed periods of time and within prescribed distances of Washington.

Above all, Judge Friedman said, Mr. Hinckley is ''not permitted to leave his parents' supervision at any time'' during any of his trips away. The judge granted him six local day visits and two 32-hour overnight visits, all within a 50-mile radius of Washington and all by terms of itineraries developed by hospital officials. The day visits must be completed without incident before the court will allow overnight trips.

Judge Friedman also ruled that Mr. Hinckley could have no contact with the news media or with Leslie DeVeau, a former St. Elizabeths patient who shot to death her sleeping 10-year-old daughter in 1982. She and Mr. Hinckley became close friends at the hospital.

Further, Mr. Hinckley is required by the court to keep himself properly medicated and, with his parents, to submit to interviews with the hospital staff after each outing. Judge Friedman said that only upon the successful completion of the day trips would Mr. Hinckley be allowed an overnight trip at a local hotel.

Mr. Levine said the Secret Service now trails Mr. Hinckley in his visits off hospital grounds in which he is accompanied by hospital personnel. The judge's order has no bearing on what the Secret Service does.
