THE No Child Left Behind Act was passed two years ago to increase accountability in schools. As a carrot to school systems, money accompanied the new standards imposed by the law. But in an extraordinary move, three Connecticut towns have told the federal government to keep its money and, therefore, its mandates.

Somers, Cheshire and Marlborough have turned away a total of $133,000 and Lisbon is also considering making the move, asking the state last month what the consequences would be of allowing children to opt out of the Connecticut Mastery Test, one of the state and federal requirements of the law. The towns said the money was not worth the trouble.''No Child Left Behind requires that we test, test, test in every grade from 2 to 10,'' said David Cressy, the Cheshire superintendent. ''If you don't improve they hit you over the head, they take away money, they reconstitute the school. It's kind of like the doctor who takes your temperature more often as a way to cure the problem, rather than help you get healthier. N.C.L.B. is a bureaucratic nightmare.''

With the fine print of No Child Left Behind becoming more evident as schools become more familiar with the act, resentment has grown. The newest list of Connecticut schools not meeting the act's requirements didn't help the act's public image. Earlier this month, the government said that 99 towns, including some of the state's wealthiest, fell short. Last Wednesday, it was announced that 81 of the state's 175 high schools, or about 46 percent, were not making enough progress under the law, after results for the Connecticut Academic Performance Test taken by sophomores in May were announced.

The ramifications of these actions are undetermined at this point, as the State Department of Education waits for the federal government to figure out whether, or how, it will apply punitive measures to towns that buck the mandates.

''I know it's a tough budget year, but we're losing control with this federal law,'' said Gilbert J. Milone, the chairman of the Lisbon Board of Education. ''Last year we didn't know that much about it, so we didn't question it. This year everybody's finding out more about it. That includes the state and federal governments; they're still figuring it out, too.''

The amount of money being rejected varied widely: Marlborough said no to about $8,000, Cheshire to almost $80,000. Somers refused almost $45,000. The entitlements are small compared to other needier municipalities. The entitlement to the three towns ranged from about 0.3 percent down to 0.1 percent of total town revenue.

''The three towns are pretty affluent, judged by family income medians and by grand list per capita,'' said Douglas Rae, a professor of management at the Yale School of Management who performed a calculation of need for 125 towns on the state's Title I list. ''Larger and poorer places depend on Title I for far larger percentages of revenue, and they are far less apt to blow it off.''

But even in good fiscal years, the rejection of federal money is uncommon. Vermont has considered turning back money tied to the act. The presidential candidate Howard Dean has said that if he were still governor of Vermont, it would have been done by now. Connecticut towns are saying no to the money for the first time since the No Child Left Behind Act of 2001 was passed into law in January 2002. More may do so, said Jeffrey Henig, a professor of political science and education at Columbia University Teachers' College in New York City, as towns digest the ramifications of being added to the state's newest list of schools not meeting progress levels.

''There is a potential for a bit of a groundswell for this kind of activity if it appears the feds are going to be very aggressive about enforcing it and Congress is not going to be moved to tinker with some of the specifics,'' said Jeffrey Henig, a professor of political science and education at Columbia University Teachers' College in New York City. ''There's just a train wreck around the corner.''

Title I is the federal government's largest program supporting elementary and secondary education, covered under the Elementary and Secondary Education Act of 1965. It has long directed money to the nation's neediest schools to raise achievement levels, to pay for more staff, professional development and other improvements. In 2002, the No Child Left Behind Act reemphasized the goals of the Elementary and Secondary Education Act. It also increased accountability for states, school districts and schools, giving greater school choice to parents and emphasizing reading skills.

Federal officials were unyielding in their insistence that the requirements of No Child Left Behind be honored. There will be more of a loss to those towns than simply Title I money, one official said.

''This is the first time school districts have indicated to states that they may choose not to receive Title I money,'' said Ron Tomalis, acting assistant secretary for the federal office of Elementary and Secondary Education, which oversees the Title I program. ''One of the things we're analyzing is what other funds are affected. There are other titled programs where the allocation to the school district is related to how much money that school district got under Title I. If a school district doesn't get Title I money, they won't get other federal funds. But we do not intend to go in and change the statute at all.''

Many towns are confused about the effects of turning down the money. After the Lisbon Board of Education wrote to the state requesting a legal opinion on rejecting the money, the state wrote back saying towns could not opt out of No Child Left Behind and Title I. But the State Department of Education had already told Cheshire that it could refuse the money and not be subject to some requirements of the program. Thomas Murphy, a spokesman for the State Department of Education, said state officials are unsure of the ramifications of rejecting the money, but that officials will reallocate the rejected money to other school districts as they await a response from the federal government.

Fueling the frustration was an announcement Dec. 3 by the State Department of Education that some of Connecticut's strongest school systems, including Cheshire, Fairfield, Guilford, Greenwich and Westport, were in need of improvement. This list followed another announcement from the State Department of Education in August that 149 elementary and middle schools in 34 districts had not made adequate yearly progress in 2001-2002 toward the goal of 100 percent of students scoring at proficient levels in math and reading. In the August list, the inclusion of towns such as Bridgeport, Hartford, New Britain, New Haven, Stamford and Waterbury surprised few who read the list. But the December list of schools included many in strong districts.

Under the act, parents in a ''needs improvement'' school can choose to send their child to another school in the district, whether or not there is room. The second year a school makes the list, supplemental services must be provided to students. The third year, corrective action must be taken, and the fourth year, the school must develop a full restructuring plan. If a school makes it on the list a fifth year, the act demands a change in the school administration.

Without a significant population at poverty level, Cheshire had not qualified for Title I money for years. But this year the school district was informed it would be receiving $79,600, much to the surprise of the superintendent, David Cressy.

''I saw that the potential administration of this small amount of money could cause us a significant amount of dollars,'' said Mr. Cressy. Cheshire's budget for the school year is about $50 million. Mr. Cressy wrote to the state alerting officials he did not want the money. They wrote back, telling him if he did not accept it, he would not be held to the more stringent accountability standards of the No Child Left Behind Act. Those include sending letters to all parents when a school has been placed on the list of schools failing to meet adequate yearly progress as determined by the act.With No Child Left Behind, Somers was labeled as not complying with adequate yearly progress in the December listing. Somers scored 100 percent in reading, 99 percent in math, with 94 percent of the eligible students taking the test.

''One child not taking the test resulted in our district not meeting the 95 percent target,'' said Thomas Jefferson, the Somers' school superintendent. ''So again, this kind of silly technicality resulted in our district being one of the many who did not meet adequate yearly progress.''

Many strong school districts have come up short of the requirements regarding participation percentages. The No Child Left Behind Act for 2002-2003 required that 65 percent of students must be proficient in math on the Connecticut Mastery Test, 57 percent must be proficient in reading, 70 percent must score above the category of basic in writing, and 95 percent of students must take the test. The bar for proficiency will be raised in August 2005, then every three years following, until all students are expected to be proficient by 2014. But in a small school system, the absence of just a few children on test day could throw off participation percentages, superintendents said

Mr. Tomalis of the federal Department of Education questioned that complaint. Makeup tests or a testing window instead of a specific date are both options for towns.

''It is very difficult to see why a child should not take that test,'' Mr. Tomalis said. ''What has happened many times in public education is that children are not tested because of the implications or the consequences of those children's scores on the overall appearance of the school. What Congress thought to ensure was that all children be included in the accountability requirement. We don't want to mask what is going on in that school. So the superintendent can make that argument, but the argument doesn't stand.''

There are no mandated federal or state consequences for not meeting adequate yearly progress requirements in the first year. But just being placed on the state list has damaged morale and created poor public images for schools that were well-regarded before No Child Left Behind arrived, administrators said. When then-state education commissioner, Theodore Sergi, announced the numbers in August, he said it would be wrong to label the schools as ''failing.'' Yet many administrators realized their inclusion on the new list would be perceived as just that.

Somers had not received Title I money for many years. The school board did not hear until the spring, seven months into the budget planning process, that it was to receive the entitlement.

''The fact that the money came to us so late was a key factor in our rejecting it,'' Mr. Jefferson said. '' The other factor is that it's money that comes with ropes and anchors attached.'' Somers' school budget is about $15 million.

If Somers had been receiving No Child Left Behind money, the district would have been required to mail the state report to the parents of 1,700 children. ''This law is unfolding, and more and more educators are questioning whether this is something that is going to set us back rather than lead us forward,'' he said. ''We're being held accountable for many things over which we have no control.''

Marlborough rejected its money strictly for financial reasons, superintendent Joseph J. Reardon said. A greater amount of money probably would have been accepted, he said.

''We're not doing this by way of protest by any means. If it didn't exceed our cost of dealing with it, we would do it,'' Mr. Reardon said. ''We're aggressive in seeking grants, even though we're a small district. But this needs to be more lucrative.'' Marlborough's school budget is $5.9 million.

With more than half of the state's schools deemed to be failing to achieve adequate yearly progress, the state's new education commissioner sounded optimistic.

''I happen to think that setting a goal that might be pie-in-the-sky and that some people have called absurd is a valuable thing to do,'' said the commissioner, Betty J. Sternberg. ''Businesses that are known to succeed set very high goals for themselves. You don't always want to apply a business model to education, but there is value to the belief that children can learn, and at high levels.''

Having said that, Ms. Sternberg offered a caveat. ''In No Child Left Behind, the devil is in the details,'' she said. ''Some of the ways we have been required to present this creates more of a problem than a solution. If I were devising this system, would I devise it this way? Probably not.''
