The federal judge who granted John W. Hinckley Jr. unsupervised visits with his parents outside of the psychiatric hospital here where he has lived for 21 years was persuaded by testimony from five doctors who saw ''clinically significant improvement'' in Mr. Hinckley since he shot President Ronald Reagan in 1981.

The doctors -- two for the federal government and three called by Mr. Hinckley's lawyer -- agreed that Mr. Hinckley would pose no danger to himself or others on such trips and that his mental illnesses, including depression and narcissistic personality disorder, were greatly reduced.

As a result, Judge Paul L. Friedman of the United States District Court for the District of Columbia issued a 50-page ruling on Wednesday, granting Mr. Hinckley six daylong trips and, if they were completed without incident, two overnight visits to a hotel, all in the Washington area. He denied Mr. Hinckley's request for a third phase of travel, unsupervised overnight trips to his parents' home in Williamsburg, Va., saying the court remained ''unconvinced that such rapid progression to overnight visits outside the Washington, D.C., area is appropriate.''

Over the last four years, Mr. Hinckley, who is 48, has made hundreds of short trips from St. Elizabeths Hospital accompanied by hospital personnel. The doctors' testimony, based on years of psychiatric evaluations of Mr. Hinckley, outweighed objections from Mr. Reagan's wife, Nancy, and convinced Judge Friedman that Mr. Hinckley was stable enough for trips supervised only by his parents.

Two doctors who treated Mr. Hinckley and appeared in court on his behalf said Mr. Hinckley had shown no evidence of psychosis, delusion or depression for more than 10 years. The doctors cited those symptoms as causes for behavior that led to Mr. Hinckley's obsession with the actress Jodie Foster and, as a way to impress her, his 1981 attempt on Mr. Reagan's life. Three other people were wounded in the attack. Mr. Hinckley was found not guilty by reason of insanity.

A third doctor who testified for Mr. Hinckley but did not treat him concurred with their views.

The two doctors testifying for the government told the court they did not object to greater freedom with proper safeguards, like post-trip evaluations by hospital officials. And they agreed that Mr. Hinckley's mental state had improved over the years, in part because of a daily 1-milligram dose of Risperdal, a common medication for psychosis.

But the government witnesses, Dr. Robert Phillips, a former director of forensic services for the Connecticut Department of Mental Health, and Dr. Raymond F. Patterson, a former medical director of St. Elizabeths, raised concerns that led the court to impose added restrictions on Mr. Hinckley's unsupervised trips, including prohibitions against any contact with reporters and with his former girlfriend, Leslie DeVeau.

While noting Mr. Hinckley's improved condition, the two government witnesses nonetheless expressed doubts that the symptoms leading to his violent behavior two decades ago had altogether disappeared. As the judge wrote, they both said Mr. Hinckley continued ''to have a sense of grandiosity and self-importance.'' And Dr. Patterson told the court that Mr. Hinckley felt he ''would always be a celebrity,'' without understanding the distinction between famous and infamous.

Dr. Phillips also said he was troubled by supervised visits Mr. Hinckley made to four bookstores in 1999. According to a letter to the hospital from the Secret Service, whose agents routinely trailed Mr. Hinckley on his excursions, he examined such books as ''Assassins: A Place Called Waco -- A Survivor's Story,'' ''Dutch -- Memoirs of Ronald Reagan,'' ''Live by the Sword -- The Secret War Against Castro and the Death of J.F.K.'' and two books about Gen. George A. Custer.

The letter also said Mr. Hinckley looked at a compact disc by the group called the Dead Kennedys and laughed.

Dr. Phillips told the court that even if the books were not inappropriate, Mr. Hinckley's examination of them ''indicated a lack of judgment, particularly since he was under such close scrutiny during his initial visits off hospital grounds.''

''Such a lack of judgment may be indicative of narcissistic behavior,'' Dr. Phillips said.

Dr. Phillips, who examined Mr. Hinckley in 2000, said he was also troubled by Mr. Hinckley's failure to mention in the examination a book about Ms. Foster that Ms. DeVeau had given him or that he had been reading books in the hospital about Hitler.

While the doctors who testified for Mr. Hinckley said they did not believe his reading tastes were ''clinically significant,'' the government doctors said his willingness to withhold information suggested a ''lack of forthrightness,'' especially in the case of the book about Ms. Foster.

Judge Friedman said Dr. Patterson believed ''that the Jodie Foster obsession remains clinically significant and must be kept in mind because it was an obsession with a fiction rather than a real relationship and was directly related to Mr. Hinckley's psychosis and the assassination attempt.''

Dr. Patterson also told the court that he disagreed with Dr. Robert Keisling, one of Mr. Hinckley's witnesses and a former official at St. Elizabeths, that it would be apparent if Mr. Hinckley fell into ''delusional thinking'' again. He described a 1995 incident when he said Mr. Hinckley ''stalked'' Jeanette Wick, then the chief pharmacist at St. Elizabeths, and compared it to behavior Mr. Hinckley exhibited toward Ms. Foster before the assassination attempt.

Judge Friedman said Dr. Patterson found ''no overt signs of delusion or psychosis'' at the time of the assassination attempt and none in Mr. Hinckley's behavior toward Ms. Wick. But ''it was on its way,'' he told the court.

Even with their concerns, however, the government doctors agreed that Mr. Hinckley deserved a chance at greater freedom, finding, as Judge Friedman wrote, nothing that ''would preclude the advancement of privileges to include limited conditional release in the custody of his parents.''

The Justice Department said Thursday that it was reviewing the decision and had not decided whether it would appeal.
