Its construction virtually complete, the newest downtown office tower here emits a distinct cobalt blue glow at night.

But with no tenants despite a three-year leasing effort, the $260 million 650,000-square-foot high-rise building assumes an ominous cast that reflects the weakening of an office market that a few years ago was among the strongest in the country.

Of the 57 million square feet of downtown offices here, about 9.9 million square feet, or 17.4 percent, is available for lease or sublease, up from 4.5 percent three years ago. In 1991, the last market trough, 16.2 percent was available. Asking rents average $34.61 a square foot a year, down 43.4 percent from $61.17 in 2000.

More worrisome, in the coming months another one million square feet may be back on the market, said William F. Collins, a senior vice president at Spaulding & Slye Colliers, a real estate services and development firm. The market has usually absorbed about one million square feet of office space a year.

''Two months ago, I thought the leasing market had turned the corner, but since then we've been hit by the perfect storm,'' Mr. Collins said, citing the mergers of Fleet Bank with Bank of America and of the insurer Manulife with John Hancock as well as the financial and job losses in a mutual fund industry faced with accusations of tainted trading practices. Over all, according to the Federal Reserve Bank of Boston, Massachusetts lost 41,500 jobs this year, suggesting even further tenant consolidations.

Slackening demand exerted more downward pressure on rents, making it difficult for the new building at 33 Arch Street to reach the rental goal of $40 to $60 square foot a year recently quoted by its developer, Dean F. Stratouly, president of Congress Group Ventures based in Cambridge.

He said that he and his partners -- the National Electrical Benefit Fund, a pension fund, and Value Enhancement Fund IV, an investment fund based in Atlanta -- had established a reserve fund that would enable them to pay the expenses of an unoccupied building for two years. That sum is about $10 million a year, brokers and city officials estimate.

''I'm confident we'll make some significant lease announcements early in 2004,'' said Mr. Stratouly, who leased 10,000 square feet of the building for his company, Congress Group Ventures. He noted that his investors may also put more money into the project.

Todd Johnson, director of Equity Real Estate for National Electrical, the pension fund of the International Brotherhood of Electrical Workers, said that he was investing in Washington, New York, San Diego and Chicago, and that Boston was considered one of the weaker United States markets.

''The mutual fund and technology sectors have been very damaged in this recession,'' Mr. Johnson said. But he said of 33 Arch Street: ''We think it's a fabulous investment; nothing else will be built here for a good while. We're in for the long term.''

But Lisa M. Campoli, executive vice president of Meredith & Grew Inc., a real estate services and development firm here, said a costly few years could lie ahead for the investors. She said that 33 Arch Street ''is a new, quality building, but there will be a capital loss.''

''The question,'' Ms. Campoli said of the capital loss, ''is how big it will be, who carries it and will it result in a change of ownership.''

Indeed, lenders are increasingly finding themselves taking back deeds to office buildings in the metropolitan region, usually in properties outside the central business district.

The keys to a Boston office complex were returned to the lender last month, in what brokers said was the first time since the early 1990's such a transfer had taken place downtown. In November, the Boeing Company, which is based in Chicago, gave the deed to the 231,000-square-foot Lincoln Plaza back to Washington Mutual Inc. of Seattle.

Boeing had acquired the historic property, which was renovated in the 1980's, when it bought the Hughes Electronics Corporation in 2000, a Boeing spokeswoman said.

Two weeks later, on Dec. 4, Credit Suisse First Boston took back the deed to a 410,000-square-foot office complex in suburban Wayland that was owned by Mr. Stratouly and a unit of Fidelity Investments. The lease of their anchor tenant, the Polaroid Corporation, was nullified as a result of the company filing for bankruptcy protection and the last Polaroid employees moved out in October. Mr. Stratouly's efforts to lease in the suburbs, where 29 percent of the 78 million square feet is available, were not successful.

This bleak landscape bodes poorly for building values, Ms. Campoli noted.

''It's a bifurcated market,'' she said. ''Buildings leased to high quality tenants are still rising in price, but values for other buildings are falling as owners decide to sell.''

In 2003, commercial properties in Boston worth about $1.2 billion were sold, compared with $2 billion in 1999, Meredith & Grew said. This year's average sale price of $237 square foot is down from $267 a year ago. The rise in sale prices from 2000 to 2003 reflected late 1990's rents that reached $80 square foot. With rents lower and vacancies higher, she said, ''over time, prices will flatten or decrease.''

In 2004, more building owners are expected to sell, Ms. Campoli said, motivated by a dwindling tenant pool and the expectation that whatever economic recovery occurs will be a gradual climb rather than a sudden bounce. ''There will be a little more distress,'' she added, ''and lenders who take back assets they don't want to manage will also sell.''

From his perspective, said Andrew M. Wright, senior consultant for Reis Inc., a real estate research firm based in New York, ''It's a tenants' market.'' Based on availability rates, Reis rates Boston as 40th out of 50 United States metropolitan markets in terms of performance compared with fifth place at the end of 1999.

Now, the tumble reflects a weak economy that has reined in the demand for space. In the early 1990's, the tailspin of the commercial real estate market resulted from an oversupply of offices.

For 33 Arch Street, this means that even if leases are signed, rents are not likely to surpass $45 a square foot for the best space, said Ronald K. Perry, an executive vice president at Meredith & Grew. ''It's not realistic to expect more in today's market,'' he said. ''The strategy there is to try to lease the low and mid-rise floors first.''

The building, which sits on a 20,000-square-foot parcel between the downtown retail and financial districts, was conceived in the 1980's by another developer.  Construction of the glass-clad tower designed by Elkus/Manfredi Architects began in the summer of 2001. Only a few weeks of construction work remain, Mr. Stratouly said, but the official completion is set for April.

Those involved with the building hope that past will not be prologue. Arch Street is in the historic Tontine Crescent, a district laid out for development by Charles Bulfinch, the architect of the Massachusetts Statehouse and other signature buildings of 19th-century Boston.

''Bulfinch,'' Mr. Stratouly explained, ''went bankrupt on the project and spent the rest of his life working as an architect to pay off his debt.''

COMMERCIAL REAL ESTATE
